 
REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA 
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SCIENCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National  
Education  
Strategy  
2004 - 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
  
December 2005 
 
CONTENTS 
 
ACRONYMS USED IN THIS REPORT 
INTRODUCTION 
 
PART A 
PRIORITY DEVELOPMENT ISSUES FOR PRE-UNIVERSITY EDUCATION  
 
A.1 GOVERNANCE: REFORMING AND STRENGTHENING MANAGEMENT CAPACITY 
A.1.1 Reforming the Central Office  
A.1.2 Decentralization 
A.1.3  School  Autonomy 
A.1.4 Educational Management Information System 
A.1.5 Reporting and Quality Assurance 
 
A.2 IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF THE TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS 
A.2.1 Curriculum Development 
National Curriculum Framework  
Rationalization of Subjects  
Content Articulation /Vertical and Horizontal Integration 
Structure of the Pre-university Education Curriculum 
Student Choice and Inclusive Curriculum 
Vocational Education Curriculum  
A.2.2 Teacher Development 
Better Forecasting of Teacher Demand 
Strengthening the Teacher Development Centre 
Teacher Training Curriculum Content and Processes 
Conditions of Employment and Merit-based Incentive Schemes 
Quality Assurance and Teacher Registration 
In-service Training and Professional Networks 
A.2.3 Textbook Development  
Better Selection of Content and Instructional Design Issues 
Coordinating the Demand and Supply of Textbooks 
Managing the Supply of Alternative  Textbooks 
Privatization 
Cost Recovery 
A.2.4 Alternative Teaching Resources 
A.2.5 Examinations and Monitoring 
Strengthening Capacity  
Monitoring Quality and International Benchmarking  
Developing and Managing National Examinations 
A.3 FINANCING PRE-UNIVERSITY EDUCATION 
A.3.1 Composition of Education Finance 
A.3.2 Instruments and Processes for Transfer of Funds 
Block Grants  
Local Government Funding  
Recurrent Expenditure Managed by the Central Office of the MOES. 
Accountability and Transparency  
Budget Planning Capacity 
A.3.3 Increasing Efficiency in the Sub-sector Funding 
Communication and Information Sharing  
Non-public Funding of Education 
  - 2 -Funds Raised by Schools 
Tax Exemptions for Educational Investments 
Reallocation of Funds. 
A3.4 Investment Program 
A.3.5 Mentoring and Support Systems  
A.4 CAPACITY BUILDING AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT -A CONCEPTUAL SHIFT  
A.4.1 Education as Cross-Sector Service 
A.4.2 Rationalization of School Distribution 
A.4.3 Inspection vs. Facilitation 
A.4.4 Professionalization of Teaching 
A.4.5 Curriculum Electives and Specializations 
A.4.6 Research-based and Data-driven Policy Development 
A.  5.  Development  of  vocational  education  in  the  context  of  overall  pre-university  education 
development strategy  
A. 5. 1. Major characteristics and the significant problems surrounding Vocational Education (VE) 
A.5.2. Objective goals of Vocational Education 
A.5.2.1. From the structural perspective of the VE system: 
A.5.2.2. From the curriculum perspective of VE 
A.5.2.3. From the institutional perspective 
A.5.2.4. From the human resources perspective of VET 
A.5.2.5. From the legal-financial perspective. 
A.5.2.6. From the infrastructure perspective of VE 
 
PART B 
POLICY MATRICES INCLUDING KEY ISSUES, OBJECTIVES, BENEFICIARIES, MONITORING 
INDICATORS AND TIMELINES  
B.1 GOVERNANCE: REFORMING AND STRENGTHENING MANAGEMENT CAPACITY: POLICY 
MATRIX  
B.2  IMPROVING  THE  QUALITY  OF  THE  TEACHING  AND  LEARNING  PROCESS:  POLICY 
MATRIX  
B.3 FINANCING PRE-UNIVERSITY EDUCATION: POLICY  MATRIX 
B.4 CAPACITY BUILDING AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT - A CONCEPTUAL SHIFT: 
POLICY MATRIX  
 
PART C 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
C.1 GOVERNANCE: REFORMING AND STRENGTHENING MANAGEMENT CAPACITY  
C.2 IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF THE TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS  
C.3 FINANCING PRE-UNIVERSITY EDUCATION 
C.4 CAPACITY BUILDING AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
 
PART D 
SUMMARY OF COST ESTIMATES  
 
PART E 
RESOURCE INPUT MATRICES  
E.1  GOVERNANCE:  REFORMING  AND  STRENGTHENING  MANAGEMENT  CAPACITY- 
RESOURCE INPUT MATRIX 
E.2 IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF THE TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS- RESOURCE 
INPUT MATRIX  
E.3 FINANCING PRE-UNIVERSITY EDUCATION- RESOURCE INPUT MATRIX  
E.4  CAPACITY  BUILDING  AND  HUMAN  RESOURCE  DEVELOPMENT-  RESOURCE  INPUT 
MATRIX  
 
 
  - 3 - 
 
ACRONYMS USED IN THIS REPORT 
 
EFA/ FTI  Education for All/Fast Track Initiative    
EMIS      Educational Management Information System 
EU         European Union 
GDP       Gross Domestic Product 
INGO      International Non-Government Organization 
ISCED     International Standard Classification of Education 
LSMS     The Living Standards Measurement Survey  
MODLG   Ministry of Decentralization and Local Government  
MOES     Ministry of Education and Science 
NCEA      National Centre for Evaluation and Assessment  
NES       National Education Strategy 
NSSED   National Strategy for Socio-Economic Development 
NGO       Non-Government Organization 
OECD     Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
PAPD     Planning and Policy Development 
PBM       Performance-based management 
VE         Vocational Education  
VET        Vocational Education and Training 
NCVET    National Council of VET 
NAVET    National Agency of VET 
WB        World Bank 
  - 4 - 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The current version of the strategy owes a great deal and relies heavily on the 
document “National Pre-university education development Strategy”, already formally 
approved by the Albanian Government in June 2004.  
The major changes of this strategy, if compared with the previous document consist 
largely in: 
- A new chapter on vocational education has been inserted and elaborated upon; 
- There is a special part in it devoted considerably to the private education service; 
- Those sentences making any close or deliberate reference to any particular 
government or any viewpoints expressly stated by it have been crossed out. 
The National Strategy on pre-university education is a fruit that has been arrived 
at by the considerable efforts spanning several years being made by both the Albanian 
specialists and their foreign counterparts. It is the common ground of work for our 
teachers and managers with high stakes in education. Thus we show our deep and 
heartfelt appreciation of their engagement in this deep endeavor.  
A deep gratitude is extended to the highly prestigious international institutions, 
in particular to the World Bank for the irreplaceable assistance they have rendered to 
development of this strategy. Their efforts are underway also in its implementation 
stages. 
This Strategy for the most part is elevated to a national platform, within 
which  all  of  the  stakeholders  are  invited  to  share  in  their  invaluable 
contributions.  It  crowns  one  of  the  more  serious  attempts  being  made  at 
engaging  an  intensely  vocational  audience,  at  establishing  an  all  inclusive 
dialogue and nurturing good understanding and faith among the various actors. 
The Strategy is intended to guarantee a modern national education system, 
which will have to promote and instigate the sustainable growth of economy and 
consolidation of democracy, as well as the success of dialogue and competition 
with the countries of the region and beyond. 
This document has been maintained together after plenty of broad and 
intensive consultation process with the various stakeholders such as teachers, 
education mangers, parents, pupils, NGOs, teachers’ unions, and high brow 
people etc. 
  - 5 - 
The draft NES is structured into two major parts.  
•  PART  A  identifies  the  priority  areas  that  need  to  be  addressed  for  the 
development of pre-university education in Albania. For these areas, it outlines 
the strengths and weaknesses within the MOES and indicates possible actions 
designed  to  enhance  the  strengths  and  eliminate  the  weaknesses.  These 
discussions are guided by international best principles and practices in education 
development  as  exemplified  in  Organization  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development (OECD) and EU countries. There are four key or priority issues 
identified in PART A, focusing on the governance and managing of education, 
improving  the  quality  of  teaching  and  learning,  financing  education  and 
developing the capacity to implement the NES. 
•  PART B operationalizes the key or priority issues in PART A by specifying for 
each issue the objectives and their associated beneficiaries, monitoring indicators, 
risks and assumptions and general timelines in the form of policy matrices. This 
information is extracted from the narrative descriptions of the respective priority 
areas in PART A and hence is summarized as four separate matrices.  
•  PART C maps out the implementation plan and provides timelines and sequence 
of activities noted in sections A and B. The information is structured along the 4 
priority areas and each area has been dealt with separately1.  
•  PART D presents a summary of cost estimates for implementing the National 
Education Strategy. The estimates are based on units costs aggregated from a 
range of sources such as the MOES, the World Bank education sector project and 
NGO’s. 
•  PART E present the Resource input matrix and the assumptions used to map and 
calculate the estimate costs.  
 
                                                 
1 The National Strategy of Education is a document at the macro level and, as such, it does not taken upon itself to treat any 
details at the micro level of all the activities and procedures related to it. In the process of implementing such a strategy a set of 
complementing projects will be drafted. 
 
  - 6 - 
PART A 
PRIORITY DEVELOPMENT ISSUES FOR PRE UNIVERSITY 
EDUCATION 
 
A1  GOVERNANCE: REFORMING AND STRENGTHENING 
MANAGEMENT CAPACITY 
 
The  implementation  of  a  highly  centralized  management  model  in  the 
governance of the country in general and in the sector of general services brings 
about  the  decrease  of  the  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  the  public 
administration. While the formal restructuring, that is decentralization as such, 
has  made  considerable  progress  in  several  sectors,  including  the  education 
sector, the decentralization rate of responsibilities and of the decision-making 
authority at the central level down to the local one in this sector have not been 
satisfactory particularly in the case of pre-university education.  
 
A.1.1 Reforming the Central Office.  
While a restructuring of the Central Office has been done thanks to the assistance 
of the World Bank, it’s worth noting that several steps have been taken in establishing 
and  organizing  the  second  level  (Regional  Educational  Departments  (RED)  and 
Educational Offices (EO), yet the subsequent challenge rising up is concerned with the 
functioning  of  a  performance-based  management  (PBM)  system  at  all  levels  of  the 
educational  governance.  This  together  with  greater  clarity  of  job  roles  will  define 
individuals’ task and associated levels of performance. Included in the performance 
management reform will be procedures to ensure the maintenance of a minimum level 
of performance and also appeals provisions to ensure equity and fairness. Transparency 
will also be increased by the system having multiple points for reporting and auditing 
enhancing in so doing the transparency and its activities. 
In  the  short  term  the  Central  Office  will  be  operating  on  a  PBM  model  of 
management with clearly defined roles and responsibilities. This initiative will then 
flow through to the regional offices, affiliate institutes and centers and communes and 
schools. The PBM model will be used to encourage greater individual responsibility for 
self development and innovation.  
A.1.2 Decentralization   
Decentralization  in  the  education  sector  will  ensure  the  expansion  of 
participation and the increase of effectiveness of the stakeholders in holding on 
to the education projects and their subsequent successful implementation.  
  - 7 -At present a detailed project on decentralization is held to be a significant 
support to the tremendous success of its implementation. According to it, MOES 
in consultation with the other line ministries and support from international agencies 
will devolve authority, responsibility and accountability for education governance to 
regional offices, communes and schools. 
The implementation platform is designed to achieve: 
•  Sharing of functional responsibilities in the education sector by means of 
the governmental levels; 
•  Identifying the right and proper conditions to increase responsibility on 
the functions to decentralized from the central level down to the school 
level. 
This  process  will  be  made  possible  through  a  careful  and  meticulous 
balance to be struck between centralization and decentralization, in itself to be 
accompanied by awareness on the risks and the chances of success. 
 
A.1.3  School Autonomy  
Under  the  decentralized  system,  schools  are  required  to  take  increased 
responsibility for planning and managing the development of the services they deliver 
along with the associated quality improvement procedures. The current organizational 
system and personnel have limited capacity to do this as, up to this point, parents and 
local communities have had little input into the activities of the schools and hence do 
not claim ownership of the development and maintenance of the quality of services 
provided by the schools. The successful realization of the school autonomy involves 
changes  to  be  made  to  some  parts  of  the  legislation.  This  will  involve  changing 
legislation to allow new practices and procedures to be implemented and supported as 
the  current  legislation  does  not  encourage  the  participation  of  parents  or  school 
directors to take initiative to be innovative and improve conditions in their schools.  
The grant scheme destined for schools, as the key ingredient of school 
autonomy will favor building capacities at the school and regional levels to engage in 
budget planning etc. This capacity will be developed progressively moving across three 
levels.  It is acknowledged that the progress will vary and this continuous support will 
be provided during the next ten years. Support will also be harnessed through forming 
clusters  of  small  schools  that  will  share  successful  strategies  in  the  move  toward 
autonomy. These schools will pilot their new experiences so that they may serve as a 
model for the decentralization of education. 
 
A.1.4 Educational Management Information System  
Having inadequate data is a major obstacle hindering the development of well 
informed  policies  and  procedures  which  are  designed  to  improve  the  quality  and 
efficiency of the education system. With assistance from the WB, the PAPD Department 
has been established to act as the key MOES unit for data analysis and policy making. 
  - 8 -This unit needs to work in conjunction with INSTAT to plan the types of data that 
should be collected and levels at which collection should take place. The WB project has 
also supported the development of an Educational Management Information System 
(EMIS) to assist the PAPD in the achievement of these tasks.  
EMIS is not just about getting data onto a computer; rather it provides the tool for 
conceptual research and the analytical investigation of the collected data. The system 
should  empower  people  at  different  levels  in  the  system  with  the  capacity  to 
disaggregate  economic,  infrastructure,  social  (including  minority  groups)  and 
educational data in terms of rural/urban and central, regional, district, municipal and 
school levels. 
 
The unit responsible for collecting and processing information should be made 
robust in order to boos its own activities in several directions: 
• The information, to be collected, should represent a unique system of 
data with regard to the nomenclature and the extent of processing as 
such; 
• The nomenclature of data, to be collected, should be a responsibility 
resting with MOES and should receive the blessing or consent of the 
highest levels; 
• Reliability and the completion of such an information should be fully 
confirmed through the institutional cooperation to be established and 
retained with INSTAT;  
• The information collected should be considered to be an institutional 
property to be placed at the service of the system. 
 
A.1.5 Reporting and Quality Assurance 
Quality Assurance of the services requires a fundamental philosophical shift, 
which is not only concerned with policy-making as such, but also with the monitoring 
QA should have both internal and external elements. Internal QA can be used by 
both  individuals  and  organizational  units.  It  provides  immediate  feedback  and 
formative evaluation outcomes and is a powerful tool which needs to be utilized more. 
To complement the self-audit, there has to be periodic external monitoring (External 
QA) which will provide a national and international comparisons of the quality of 
performance of education planners, administrators etc. The dual system of internal and 
external QA mechanisms will need to be built into the management system and will 
need to have multiple pathways for reporting and auditing to increase transparency. 
The  dual  monitoring  of  school  performance  creates  the  possibility  of  not  only 
undertaking effective improvement actions in the form of assistance from specialized 
local and national units but also bringing to account those responsible. If a school fails 
to achieve its standards and student achievement objectives which are specified and 
defined in the school’s development plans, the whole school management support team 
  - 9 -is  responsible  and,  for  example,  the  Local  Government  could  limit  the  functions 
delegated to the school and disband the school board. Currently, the inspectorate is 
being  reformed  to  operate  at  two  levels  (central  and  local)  for  the  pre-university 
education system.  
 
A.2 IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF THE TEACHING AND 
LEARNING PROCESS 
 
Right after the changes affecting the political-economic system, the 
governmental initiatives have been directed towards a market-driven economy 
and democratic and civil society as well as  the installation of the market 
economy. 
The National Strategy for Socio-Economic Development [NSSED] envisages the 
long term and short term objectives focusing on boosting the sustainable economic 
growth, reducing poverty and other social related problems.  
The  fulfillment  of  such  lofty  goals  requires  at  all  costs  the  reforming  of  the 
education system which could be turned into a back-up system to carry forwards the 
initiatives laid down. Central to the reform is the quality of the teaching and learning 
processes.  The  current  teaching  and  learning  processes  and  the  pre-university 
education curriculum were last reviewed in 1983. Since then there have been very little 
if any changes made.  
To  increase  the  average  level  of  education  completed  by  its  citizens  the 
Government of Albania is implementing a new structure for pre-university education, a 
three level 5 (primary) + 4 (basic) + 3 (secondary) grade structure. Free and compulsory 
education will occur up to Grade 9 (previously it was up to Grade 8). Adopting this 
structure will bring the Albanian education system in line with other countries in the 
Balkan region as well as those in the EU and OECD.  
The early levels (5 + 4) will concentrate on basic literacy and numeracy along 
with civic education and healthy living skills, providing the basis for developing the 
knowledge and skills for a democratic society and a knowledge society. The secondary 
level will build on the basic level education and develop the knowledge and skills 
necessary for everyday life in a market-driven and democratic world. It will have two 
pathways, one that leads directly into academic professions and one that will allow 
students to develop vocational skills necessary to become productive members of the 
society when they leave secondary school. 
 
A.2.1 Curriculum Development      
National Curriculum Framework 
 The MOES began working on curricula reform in 1994. While there has been 
some work done in this regard, there is still a considerable amount of conceptualization 
  - 10 -and curriculum development work yet to be accomplished in areas such as developing 
and adopting a national curriculum framework and national policies. 
The  dependent  structures  such  as  the  ICS,  CTCE  and  NECEE,  which  are 
funded and having as a reference any goals written up and defined by MOES, 
are  considered  to  be  the  cogs  of  a  single  wheel  in  improving  quality  of  the 
educational services. 
Under  the  circumstances,  MOES  aside  from  monitoring  and  closely 
evaluating the work done, should see to the development of the accountability in the 
organizational units, of the policies for reporting and monitoring, and of the quality of 
curriculum development output indicators etc. 
Finally, there is an urgent need to make curriculum development a full-time and 
ongoing profession to ensure the adoption of continuous improvement principles in the 
education development and management process. 
 
Rationalization of Subjects  
There is a need to develop a curriculum that focuses on the know-ledge, skills 
and  attributes  needed  by  children  to  function  in  a  free  market  economy  and  a 
democratic society. This requires a shift from the current collection of isolated subjects 
to an approach that is focused on key learning outcomes. The curriculum experts need 
to explore new subject options and/or the integration of subjects to meet the demand 
for the new knowledge and skills. 
 
Content Articulation /Vertical and Horizontal Integration 
One of the reasons for the high student drop-out rate has been the lack of interest 
in  pre-university  education2.  In  light  of  this,  there  is  a  need  to  align  the  current 
curriculum content and processes with the emerging needs and aspirations of students 
and  parents.  Authentic  and  integrated  learning  activities  that  reflect  everyday  life 
experience should be included. Integrating subjects for example will not only facilitate 
the possibility of making the learning more relevant but also reduce the number of 
separate textbooks that may be necessary, addressing one of the major costs impacting 
on pre-university education. 
The  current  student  workload  is  high  compared  to  OECD  guidelines  and 
benchmarks. The curriculum reform should consider the quality of learning rather than 
the  quantity,  allowing  more  time  for  student  to  experiment,  research,  reflect  and 
synthesize information. 
  
Structure of the Pre-university Education Curriculum 
Changing the structure of the pre-university system into 5+4+3 (5 years of 
basic  education,  4  year  of  lower  secondary  education  and  3  years  of  upper 
                                                 
2 (The Living Standards Measurement Survey [LSMS], 2002)  
  - 11 -secondary education) dictates reviewing the curricula frame in order to provide 
responses to issues that arise with our time and age and to bring it closer and 
closer to the systems of countries in the regions and in the countries of EU.  
Within this structure, the curriculum needs to reflect a clear vertical integration of 
concepts and eventual articulation with university programs. The use of electives needs 
to be care-fully planned to provide the gradual development of specializations. 
 
Student Choice and Inclusive Curriculum 
The  rapid  inner  developments  and  the  ever  growing  demand  to  join  the 
European community bring to the fore the ever urgent need to increase the flexibility in 
drafting  and  designing  the  curriculum  so  that  schools  and  local  authorities  can 
customize the curriculum to make it relevant to local circumstances or long-running 
tradition. Appropriate policies guiding the use of electives and subject clusters can 
provide  that  flexibility.  In  these  areas  of  student  choice  and  inclusion,  while  the 
curriculum framework and national standards are set centrally by the MOES, the school 
boards and local governments need the flexibility for example to approve the school 
curriculum  policy,  and  prioritize  specific  curriculum  projects  in  school  grant 
applications. 
  
Non-public education 
The permission granted in favor of opening up private-owned schools in 1995, 
heralded a steady rise in their number and an expansion of their services at such a 
moderate pace, that with the year 2004 in mind, the private sector to date by and large 
encompasses: 5 % of children at the pre-school education level, 3, 7 % of pupils at the 
pre-university  education  (  3  %  in  basic  education,  6  %  in  the  general  secondary 
education and 7 % in the vocational secondary education) and 2 % of students. At the 
same time it’s worth noting that several education services such as the publication, 
printing and dissemination/distribution of school textbooks as well as construction, 
rehabilitation and maintenance of school buildings or facilities have already undergone 
the privatization process. 
The  attendance  of  such  schools  by  a  substantial  number  of  pupils  does  not 
necessarily happen because of any offer at all in terms of subjects contained within the 
curriculum package, since any changes that set them apart from the public schools are 
largely confined to the inclusion of the informatics subject or the learning of a foreign 
language  at  an  earlier  stage  as  well  as  the  learning  of  another  additional  or 
complementary language. The attendance of such schools is deemed to be more as a 
counterbalance against the low quality level prevailing at state-owned schools. This 
reality tips the balance in favor of private schools owing to the small number of pupils 
per class, better didactical and reference resources and rich equipments in laboratories, 
and better qualified teaching personnel carefully selected and recruited by such schools. 
Nonetheless there is not as yet any official comparative study to date that brings out 
any differences in terms of students’ achievements in the private and public schools. 
However  quality  level  in  such  schools  is  highly  likely  to  be  compromised  by  the 
  - 12 -guiding business principles. The tendency is for business interests to encroach upon 
quality; hence exacerbation of quality in education services will set in. 
The tight concentration of private schools in some of the big towns, as already 
witnessed by all and sundry, has limited to varying degrees the access of pupils coming 
from rural areas to their education. On the other hand, the extraordinarily hefty prices 
they charge, has transformed them into education centers to be attended only by the 
privileged “elite”, mainly the well-off and the wealthy. 
Interestingly, the education service is deemed to be the means of increasing the 
scope of educational offer towards the wide range of interests and various needs of 
many educational customers.  
For this significant reason alone the private education service ought to be encouraged and 
promoted by means of: 
-  increasing the size and number of private schools at all levels across the 
education system; 
-  adding more to their kind and range; 
-  expanding the various kinds of other educational services. 
Another significant reason behind the expansion of the private education service 
is closely tied to the financial considerations. Despite the necessary increase of the share 
of GDP in the education sector and the need for a far more aggressive drive towards 
drawing in foreign funds, other alternative sources of funding are badly needed in 
order to realize the so-called leap in quality and in the achievements of pupils. On this 
and other accounts it’s of the essence to align business interests with the education 
market drives and tendencies.   
Encouraging  policies  towards  private  education  institutions  are  to  be  further 
considered and developed through a set of mechanisms such as easing fiscal policies 
and/or the government being committed to covering the better part of the recurrent 
operational expenditures. These mechanisms are to be closely pursued especially in the 
vocational and post-secondary education, in order for them to be a close fit for the labor 
market needs. In the case of higher education, in order to take off the pressure of the 
state budget for the over-expenditures in this sector, in order to make sure that there 
appears and exists a fair number of offers; as well for the schools of children of special 
needs. Favors of the ad hoc type could be basically done in accordance with the pressing 
needs, such as providing for access to basic or general secondary education in the less 
favorable or disadvantaged areas in order to maintain a normal rate of operation in the 
areas that are singled out for their over-crowded schools. 
Expanding the private educational service market beyond the private schooling for 
the  training  and  counseling  administered  to  the  benefit  of  teachers  and  education 
managers alike, monitoring and assessing the various aspects of the education services, 
for the assistance rendered to the benefit of pupils with special needs etc, combined 
with a close supervision of the quality of such services, and in ensuring the adequate 
competition as a prerequisite to boosting the quality of such services. 
  - 13 -The quality as such much claimed and sought out by the wide range of private 
education  customers  will  be  safeguarded  through  the  systematic  and  periodic 
inspection and the full transparency around the achievements of pupils at these schools. 
Any risks posed by the unfair competition between the private and public schools 
at the expense of the services provided by the latter could be best avoided or be kept at 
a  minimum  through  the  management  and  performance-based  teaching/learning 
process and the high degree of the transparency in such achievements towards the 
refined public and professional opinion. 
 
A.2.2 Teacher Development  
 
Better Forecasting of Teacher Demand 
The  up-to-now  period  of  the  Albanian  ongoing  transition  has  been 
characterized from a marked and deep lack focused and systematic investment in 
the training of teachers. 
Pre-service  training  has  been  always  provided  by  Universities  but  in-service 
training since independence has been conducted in an uncoordinated manner. Various 
agencies,  both  domestic  and  overseas  ones,  have  conducted  some  sporadic  teacher 
training, mainly for teachers in primary grades. This lack of a coherent approach has 
resulted  in  poor  quality  teachers  and  an  increasing  number  of  untrained  teachers 
teaching  in  schools.  The  lack  of  a  thorough  and  a  coherent  method  has  reduced 
significantly the effectiveness of such trainings. 
 
Strengthening the Teacher Development Centre 
With the assistance of the World Bank the establishment of the Education 
Center of Training and Qualifications (ECTQ) was made a reality. Among other 
things, its establishment was triggered and necessitated by the lack of teachers’ 
standards, qualifications, training modules, performance appraisal etc. Part of 
the National Education Strategy is to develop clear guidelines for the roles and 
responsibilities  of  the  Center’s  staff  in  relation  to  the  central  and  regional 
stakeholders.  
Teacher Training Curriculum Content and Processes 
To  develop  a  sound  basis  for  teacher  education,  there  is  an  urgent  need  to 
develop  a  detailed  list  of  teacher  competencies  for  primary,  basic  and  secondary 
education teachers.  These competencies need to be mapped onto pre-service programs 
which in turn should be guided by the Bologna conventions. Further, professional 
practice needs to be integrated into the new programs.  
  - 14 - 
Conditions of Employment and Merit-based Incentive Schemes 
To attract and retain high quality teachers the ECTQ in close cooperation with 
MOES, should research new incentive schemes that are based on performance and 
merit rather than being based simply on length of service. Some urgent action is needed 
to bring some respectability to the profession by matching its salaries with other civil 
servants. 
 
Considering new models and alternatives to teacher training 
Apart  from  the  basic  training  scheme,  the  ECTQ  should  consider 
alternative  models  for  ensuring  teacher  training  such  as  models  for  training 
teachers in mixed-ability (collective) classrooms, the model of training teachers 
for certain classrooms, the hybrid model, the frontal and distance learning.  
 
Quality Assurance and Teacher Registration 
There arises the need to develop the process of teacher registration and 
accreditation  as  well  as  the  implementation  of  the  procedures  for  ongoing 
monitoring process. 
Teacher registration should be a prerequisite for employment as a teacher. The 
Centre  should  develop  initial  and  ongoing  monitoring  processes  for  teacher 
accreditation and registration. These processes should cover the application, approval 
and dispute resolution areas and need to  be  formally  drafted  and  adopted  by  the 
MOES. The development of these processes should be done in conjunction with the 
reform of teacher training programs to ensure that the competencies expected as part of 
the registration process are included in the training programs. 
 
In-service Training  
This is perhaps one of the most critical issues confronting the MOES due to the 
urgent need to train the large number of currently untrained teachers and to upgrade 
the skills of others with regard to developing competencies in new and innovative 
teaching  methods.    The  ongoing  professional  development  of  teachers  needs  to  be 
strategically aligned with their needs. Such training needs to focus on aspects such as 
the new attributes and subject knowledge that teachers need along with exposure to the 
new teaching and learning models.  
To  ensure  quality  and  efficiency,  alternative  modes  of  delivering  in-service 
training need to be considered. For example, the training could involve the use of 
intensive block training, distance learning, or a hybrid of these modes. Further, in-
service training does not need to be restricted to universities with bodies such as Non-
Government Organizations (NGOs), international agencies, and teacher professional 
associations becoming involved.  
  - 15 -In-service professional development activities should be credited towards formal 
qualifications or meeting the requirements for ongoing teacher registration. 
 
A.2.3 Textbook Development 
Textbooks are central to the teaching-learning process. Currently, as a way of 
compensating  for  their  limited  teaching  competencies,  teachers  tend  to  use  the 
textbooks as "props", covering the content of the textbooks rather than using the content 
to address the objectives of the curriculum. This process reflects the teachers’ limited 
understanding of the objectives inherent in the curriculum. The role of textbooks needs 
to be looked at in particular with regard to their design and development.  
 
Better Selection of Content and Instructional Design Issues 
As  indicated  above,  the  role  of  textbooks  in  the  teaching-learning  process  is 
central and a crucial aspect of this is the content and instructional design of the books. 
There is need to revise and align the textbook development process with the QA models 
used by EU countries for developing and maintaining their education quality. The 
current approach of having textbooks written by university professors may not be the 
best  tactic.  As  occurs  in  many  developed  countries,  classroom  teachers  should  be 
encouraged to get involved in the design and development of textbooks. The new 
generation  of  textbooks  should  promote  the  adoption  of  teaching  and  learning 
approaches  which  are  based  on  real-life  situations  and  are  student-centered  and 
activity-driven.  They  should  also  encourage  group  work  as  well  as  independent, 
creative and critical thinking. To address this, there is a need to train potential authors 
in instructional design principles and their underlying pedagogical assumptions. 
 
Coordinating the Demand and Supply of Textbooks 
There is a need for a planned and coordinated approach to textbook development 
particularly as the pre-university curriculum is revised. The new curriculum will most 
likely have a different mix of subjects and associated content which will determine the 
number  and  range  of  textbooks,  many  of  which  may  have  to  be  new.  The  EMIS 
database will assist in planning the demand and supply of different titles. Currently, 
using the supply (as opposed to the "demand") model, extra books are being printed 
unnecessarily for certain subjects.  
 
Managing the Demand and Supply of Alternative Textbooks 
With a student-centered learning approach, alternative texts are important. The 
selection of alternative books should involve all stakeholders such as parents, teachers, 
professional subject associations, and local government and they in turn may apply 
pressure on authors and the publishing houses for an increase in variety and quality. 
With the decentralization of schools, people who are in closest contact with subjects are 
  - 16 -the teachers and they should be responsible for the management and monitoring of the 
demand and supply of textbooks. 
 
Privatization 
With the various levels and the whole mix of schools in mind, the development 
and distribution of school textbooks should be devolved to the private sector. While the 
MOES should still have the responsibility for QA processes and the recommendation of 
specific  class  textbooks,  the  process  of  selection  of  class  textbooks  should  be  a 
transparent one done on a competitive basis. The MOES has begun some work in this 
regard and intends to gradually privatize the entire textbook development activity. The 
MOES  will  approve  the  production  quality,  instructional  design  and  suitability  of 
content  for  the  various  grades  and  in  that  role  will  be  a  QA  agent  rather  than  a 
publishing house. 
  
Cost Recovery 
Currently, students in pre-university education are fortunate to have textbooks 
provided free of charge. However, as this imposes huge costs on the education sector 
which are not sustainable in the long term, there is a need to explore alternative means 
of financing textbook development and use. The MOES with support from international 
agencies will consider various options. This is critical because, as new teaching and 
learning  approaches  are  introduced,  a  larger  variety  of  learning  resources  will  be 
needed and they will need to be funded.  
 
A.2.4  Alternative Teaching Resources 
 
The current key resource for pre-university education is the class text-books with 
teachers  teaching  only  the  content  of  textbook  with  little  or  no  consideration  of 
alternative  resources,  including  the  use  of  ICTs  which  is  very  limited  in  the  pre-
university education program. To redress these deficits, there is a need to gradually 
introduce additional textbooks and other reference books by starting classroom libraries 
and in larger schools where it is possible to establish proper libraries with internet 
facilities.  
The newly created Centre for Teacher Development (CTD) and the Institute for 
Curriculum and Standards (ICS) should be researching ways to develop and support 
additional resources for pre-university education. One option for them is to work with 
and support teachers in the development of examples of good practices which can then 
be shared nationally with other teachers. They should also be constantly engaged in 
researching new and innovative practices, teaching and learning resources for different 
subjects and developing CD-ROMs and/or hard copies of materials for distribution to 
schools which enjoy no access to Internet. 
  - 17 -While the roles of CTD and ICS have been clearly defined, it would be necessary 
for them to start thinking about their new functions to match the new forms, which 
should be on the look out for new practices and the new teaching-learning sources. 
 
A.2.5 Examinations and Monitoring 
 
Within  the  overall  framework  of  the  education  reform,  two  important  basic 
institutional reforms were the establishment of the National Centre for Evaluation and 
Assessment (NCEA) as well as the Inspectorate within the MOES. With regard to the 
NCEA,  this  organizational  restructuring  needs  to  be  complemented  with  the 
development  of  the  human  capacity  to  increase  the  monitoring  and  evaluating 
capabilities of the NCEA to international standards.  Further, there is a need to develop 
an external QA system (see A.1.5) to monitor the performance of the NCEA and to 
increase its efficiency.  
 
Strengthening Capacity  
The  current  capacity  in  NCEA  seems  to  be  largely  in  the  area  of  statistical 
knowledge. This needs to be expanded to include education experts who can develop 
rigorous indicators of students' learning outcomes.  The Centre also needs some new 
equipment to carry out its work efficiently and to undertake national and international 
benchmarking of the learning process.  
 
Monitoring Quality and International Benchmarking  
Since the Government wants to develop the country to the point that will enable 
them to move into the EU and engage with other neighboring countries, there is an 
urgent  need  to  develop  national  and  international  benchmarking  and  monitoring 
systems. The newly formed NCEA has been given some training under the current WB 
education project but there is still significant capacity building yet to be achieved. For 
example, the development of an equitable grading and ranking system to moderate the 
results from around different regions in the Republic is yet to be considered. 
  
Developing and Managing National Examinations 
The public confidence in the current examination system is very low and the 
NCEA has been assigned the task of bringing integrity and public confidence to the 
system.  It  has  to  develop  a  transparent  but  secure  system  free  from  unauthorized 
disclosure  of  examination  information.    The  process  of  conducting  and  grading 
examinations should also be reviewed to remove the possibility of cheating or undue 
influence. For example, teachers should not be allowed to supervise their own students 
and  students’  examination  papers  should  be  randomly  coded  rather  than  have 
recognized labels. All conflicts of interest or possible compromising situations need to 
be eliminated from the examination management system. 
  - 18 -The NCEA should research and consult with all stakeholders to develop a single 
examination at the end of Grade 12. This examination should serve not only as an 
indicator of the knowledge achieved by Grade 12 students but also as a measure for 
university entry. The proposed "subject clusters" approach in the secondary curriculum 
will  allow  articulation  into  university  programs  and  consequently,  the  level  of 
achievement in the Matura examination can be used by universities to decide their 
preferred entry cut-offs.  
 
A.3 FINANCING PRE-UNIVERSITY EDUCATION  
 
Since 1989, public expenditure on education as a percentage of Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) has been gradually decreasing from 4% in 1989 and 5% in 1991, to 3% in 
2000  and  2001,  to  2.9%  in  2003.  This  expenditure  is  lower  than  the  average  in 
neighboring countries. The percentage expenditure of the public budget for education 
compared to total public expenditure for year 2003 is only 10.3 %. 
This indicator compared to 11.4 % in 1995, and 11.5 % in 1996 does not witness 
any growth at all. 
The changing economic and socio-cultural aspirations within the country have 
imposed  significant  demands  on  the  current  education  system  and  if  it  is  not 
appropriately funded there is a risk of further deterioration of services in the sector, 
particularly the pre-university sub-sector. This could bring such services at a standstill 
if measures are not appropriately launched. 
Since  the  late  nineties,  the  demand  for  capital  expenditure  has  increased 
significantly due to the damage of school premises during the transition period and the 
1997 crisis and the lack of appropriate ongoing maintenance. MOES should exploring 
alternative means of funding this demand from national sources. 
 
A.3.1  Instruments and Processes for Transfer of Funds  
 
Block Grants  
Whatever the process, the system does not appear to be responsive to the 
changing needs as exemplified by the maintenance issue above. There are other 
examples: First, the increased categories of activities in the pre-university sub-
sector and distribution of resources among those categories have changed but the 
total  expenditure  in  education  has  not,  confirming  that  the  system  is  not 
responsive to the rapidly changing conditions in this sub-sector. And second, the 
increase in internal and external migration and the flexibility for students to 
attend schools in neighboring regions may pose problems in the area of cross-
regional funding. To overcome these and similar problems and to be responsive 
to  the  changing  demands  and  allow  flexibility  and  equity  for  students  and 
  - 19 -regions, a per-capita funding model that links directly to schools may be an 
alternative. Rather than using pre-determined amounts, this model is based on 
actual student numbers which can act as an indicator of the size of the school, the 
extent of facilities, the number of teacher and support staff that are needed and 
not necessarily in the amount of money predetermined by way of pragmatic and 
archaic methods as has been the case up to the present day. 
 
Local Government Funding  
Under the current system, all maintenance of schools is the responsibility of Local 
Government and this is funded from the preconditioned grant transferred from the 
national budget and/or through Local Governments’ contribution generated through 
local tax etc. It is unclear how much funds are generated locally and how much is 
actually spent on maintenance of school building and facilities as the actual percentage 
of funds made available by Local Governments for the education sector generally and 
for the sub-sectors specifically is not available to the MOES’s central finance directorate. 
Also,  the  MOES  does  not  have  any  information  about  the  accountability  of  the 
disbursement  of  Local  Government  funds.  This  lack  of  information  seriously 
undermines MOES's financial planning and its ability to provide an equitable funding 
model.  
 
Recurrent Expenditure Managed by the Central Office of the MOES. 
The Central Office of the MOES manages the disbursement of all other recurrent 
expenditure such as those related to the publication of the textbooks, scholarships, 
didactic materials and transport for teachers and students. In light of potential cost 
benefits due to economies of scale, maintaining some of these services at the Central 
level have advantages but some of the activities such as transport and scholar-ships 
would be better under the control of the Local Governments and communes. Some of 
this  re-alignment  to  increase  efficiency  and  cost  savings  may  happen  through  the 
decentralization process. Irrespective of the division of responsibility, detailed budget 
planning is necessary to increase the accountability of both the Local Governments and 
the Central Office and both should be able to disaggregate the costs for each variable if 
necessary.  
 
Accountability and Transparency  
The accountability of all funds transferred from the MOES Central Office to the 
Local governments and those contributed by Local Governments should be made more 
transparent. 
The inclusion of budget line items for all major activities, through the central and 
local/regional funding, is going to clear up some of the confusion hovering around. 
MOES has identified at least seven programs which do not figure in at the level of the 
local government. 
  - 20 -The presence of such line items will ensure the realization of disbursements 
as planned and in compliance with the timelines. But, more significantly, the proposed 
practices would help the financial planners to better identify the pitfalls and actual 
expenditures at the various levels of the system. 
 
Budget Planning Capacity 
The current supply model of the education services is reflected in the financing 
system. One of the key reform assumptions is to shift to a demand- and performance-
based model for managing and financing the sub-sector. For this to happen, there is a 
need to develop capacities at the various levels in the financial system to engage in not 
only developing detailed budget plans but also implementing and managing the plan.  
 
A.3.2 Increasing Efficiency in the Sub-sector Funding  
 
Communication and Information Sharing  
The Local Government’s contribution to the education sector generally should be 
made available to the MOES to assist in the planning of its budget. This financial 
information sharing is significantly lacking among the MOES, the Ministry of Finance, 
Local Government, Communes and schools. The EMIS planned for the MOES should be 
designed to collect and manage such information. A team of finance experts should be 
engaged to design the types of data, levels of recording, types and level of analysis that 
will enhance the MOES's capacity to plan and manage its activities.  
 
Funds Raised by Schools 
The  current  practices  of  pooling  all  monies  raised  by  schools  into  a  single 
account,  imposing  a  tax  on  the  funds  raised,  as  well  as  the  decisions  made  by 
municipalities and communes on such sums of money raised should be thoroughly 
overhauled. Schools and communities should be allowed to have full control on these 
incomes pooled in order to foster community ownership of school development.  
The current rates/percentages that move into the state budget will have to 
be  re-examined  with  the  view  to  reducing  them,  in  order  for  parents  and 
communities alike to be further encouraged. The school should be permitted to 
have a full autonomy in using these funds raised from its own equipment and 
facilities resources as well as those raised by its own employees working extra 
hours.  
 
Tax Exemptions for Educational Investments 
Given the shrinking public sector funding for pre-university education in recent 
years,  schools  should  be  encouraged  to  source  alternative  funding.  To  encourage 
benevolent contributions from the public, all alternative funding should be tax exempt 
  - 21 -so that every lek given for school development is used for improving and supporting 
the quality of education. Also, NGOs, teachers and students who purchase educational 
equipment  such  as  computers  should  be  exempted  from  associated  taxes.  The 
Government has considered this option and there are some provisions in place but their 
complexity deters people from seeking such exemptions. There is an urgent need to 
simplify education tax regulations/exemptions so that more people can benefit. 
 
Reallocation of Funds. 
Pre-university education is the top priority sub-sector of the education system. 
MOES has agreed to regulate the expenditure in the higher education by proposing a 
‘user pays’ model to offset the reduced funding to other sub-sectors. The funds freed up 
by these processes will be redirected to pre-university education.  
 
A.3.4 Mentoring and Reform Support Systems  
 
There may be a risk that some Communes or Local Governments may not have 
the human capacity to run and manage schools with high-degree cost-effectiveness. 
This  situation  could  be  checked  by  establishing  partnerships  between  them.  As  an 
alternative, the IPS and the MOES Central and Regional Offices may provide on-going 
mentoring by assigning designated staff to work with the local staff.  
A similar situation may also exist at school level where some schools may not feel 
comfortable  with  the  additional  tasks  such  as  budget  planning  and  reporting  on 
financial management. These schools may form into school clusters with a common 
core budget. 
 
 
A.4 CAPACITY BUILDING AND HUMAN RESOURCE 
DEVELOPMENT – A CONCEPTUAL SHIFT  
 
The transition from a centralized and supply-driven system to one that is based 
on  and  increased  accountability  and  demand  that  is  often  assessed  by  the  local 
authority and end users requires a fundamental conceptual shift in thinking. These 
conceptual  changes  are  central  to  ensuring  changes  to  policies  and  practices  at  an 
operational level. The underlying assumptions around demand-driven and multi-level 
accountability systems are particularly complex and quite alien to the country’s history 
with communist ideology, an ideology which is based on a centralized supply-driven 
model. The relationships and associated reallocation of responsibilities between central 
and local authorities, between the State and the individual, between the State and the 
private sector etc. need to undergo considerable change under the proposed reform 
model.  This  section  of  the  NES  addresses  some  of  the  significant  shifts  that  are 
necessary in the education sector as part of its reform.  
  - 22 -Given the increasing cost to the public sector budget of providing high quality 
education, new and more efficient systems need to be considered. The government has 
agreed to adopt a demand-based approach to increasing efficiency supported by a 
rigorous accounting and monitoring system built around the EMIS project. As a result, 
there are several specific considerations which are noted below as themes that underpin 
the whole NES. 
 
A.4.1 Education as Cross-Sector Service 
 
A national education system is a service sector which has the task of ensuring 
that future citizens have the necessary knowledge, skills and attitudes to complement 
the national economic development plan of the Republic. It underpins the satisfaction of 
the  national  labor  market  needs  and  the  socio-cultural  aspirations  of  the  people. 
However, these needs and aspirations cannot be met by the education sector alone and 
activities  such  as  the  National  Curriculum  Framework  should  involve  cross-sector 
dialogue and input to ensure that the proposed framework reflects the needs of all 
sectors. The essential nature of cross-sector dialogue and coordination can be seen in 
those activities sponsored and supported by different ministries. For example programs 
that tie in and target “working children”, “school food program”, “family subsidies” 
etc. are managed by several different ministries.  In order to enhance and bring to a 
higher level their effectiveness there is a need to maximize their impact by a better 
coordination between them. 
 
A.4.2 Rationalization of School Distribution  
 
Given the high rate of migration, there is a need to develop a reliable school 
mapping database because, through such a database, more accurate and long term 
planning may be achieved which in turn will allow better use of the limited resources 
available to pre-university education. Uneconomic and unsustainable schools will need 
to be rationalized and alternative models for the delivery of education, particularly to 
areas of very low density population, should be developed and tried out. By this means, 
the MOES will ensure that there is not only equity of access to education but also 
economic and administrative efficiency. It is important here to differentiate between 
schools and classes as the unit under discussion because while the overall demand for 
new places and hence the demand for new schools may not increase, the redistribution 
of students caused by internal migration may well create a need for new classrooms.  
MOES should make sure that pupils are provided access and equal chances to the 
offer of education. 
This rationalization may present challenges to the regional- and commune-based 
systems where schools with small numbers of children making them unviable exist only 
few kilometer apart because of district and regional boundaries, but the insignificant 
number of pupils is rendering these schools beyond use. 
  - 23 - 
A.4.3 Inspection vs. Facilitation 
 
The role of inspectorates within the MOES is currently seen as a punitive and 
control  mechanism.  This  has  to  change  if  teachers  are  to  become  educational 
professionals  who  are  innovative  and  willing  to  engage  in  self  development.  This 
failure in the system is the responsibility of every one associated with the task at all 
levels.    The  best  option  is  to  be  proactive  and  continuously  provide  support  and 
guidance.  This  conceptual  shift  is  central  to  the  success  of  ‘self  reporting’  process 
introduced as part of internal QA monitoring concept. Individuals should trust the 
system enough that they will report honestly. Otherwise, the problems of inaccurate 
data and feedback will continue and any subsequent planning based on that data will 
be of little value.   
 
A.4.4 Professionalization of Teaching  
 
The current workload of teachers needs to be paid some new attention especially 
in relation to the status of the teachers’ profession.  
Unlike many EU countries teaching in the country is not regarded as a full-time 
profession. Given that one of the objectives of the reform is to develop capacities and 
systems to align with EU and OECD countries, the teaching service should be viewed as 
part of the public service in Albania and teachers should be working a full 35-40 hrs 
week. Such an approach will increase the commitment by teachers and also justify 
increasing their salaries. One of the advantages of promoting full-time employment is 
that economic efficiencies can be introduced by insisting on multi-grade competencies 
for primary teachers and at least two teaching subjects for secondary teachers. These 
suggestions may mean a reduction in the total number of teachers but it will improve 
the student-teacher ratio, bringing the Albanian education system in line with other 
countries in the region. 
To ensure that there is an independent monitoring of teacher quality, teacher 
professional  association  and  networks  should  be  developed.  In  many  developed 
countries, these aspects are a significant resource for improving teaching and learning 
processes in schools, curriculum innovations and designing, trialing and evaluating 
textbooks. 
 
A.4.5 Curriculum Electives and Specializations  
 
Education for all does not mean that every student needs to study the same 
subjects in the same manner. The education system should be designed such that at the 
lower levels there is foundational knowledge that all children need to study such as 
basic literary and numeracy and ICT competencies. As students move to higher levels, 
  - 24 -there should be some choice and the curriculum should have the flexibility to provide 
subject blocks such as social science, business and economics, engineering, medical 
sciences etc. as options. This would allow a degree of specialization based on student 
choice while reducing the need to provide all subjects to all students. Secondary schools 
should have the autonomy to decide what subject combination they will offer based on 
local needs and stakeholder demands.  
Another aspect of curriculum choice is that many new subjects such as civics 
education,  business  education,  multimedia  and  communication  etc.  are  emerging. 
These developments mean that curriculum developers need to continuously review the 
subjects that are being offered and explore options such as replacing outdated subjects 
with  new  and  relevant  ones  and/or  integrating  related  subjects  into  more 
comprehensive ones. Integrating subjects to enhance learning outcomes will also reduce 
the overall cost of textbooks.  
These changes to the curriculum - student choice and the restructuring of subjects 
-  have  implications  for  teacher  numbers,  textbooks  and  classrooms  and  may  face 
considerable opposition as the current roles of many subject experts will be challenged. 
However,  the  curriculum  developers  need  to  access  the  international  literature  to 
illustrate to all stakeholders the benefits of this approach to curriculum development. 
 
A.4.6 Research-based and Data-driven Policy Development   
 
The MOES has established the PAPD to engage in rigorous analytical work in the 
area  of  policy.  There  is  an  urgent  need  to  increase  the  number  of  staff  in  this 
department and to provide them with considerable capacity building in order for them 
to perform this task adequately. The MOES has also initiated the development of an 
EMIS  system  to  collect  data  at  various  levels  within  the  pre-university  education 
system.  To obtain the best outcome from the EMIS and the PAPD, there is a need to 
develop a "culture of continuous improvement" - continuous curriculum development, 
continuous  school  improvements,  and  continuous  human  resource  development. 
However, in order to achieve worthwhile improvement, all of the policy decisions 
regarding the education sector in general and the pre-university education in particular 
should  be  based  on  data.  Where  data  is  not  available,  the  MOES  should  either 
commission  special  research  or  modify  the  EMIS  to  allow  appropriate  data  to  be 
collected to obtain an accurate assessment of the issue of concern.  
  - 25 - 
A5. DEVELOPMENT OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION IN THE  
CONTEXT OF THE OVERALL PRE-UNIVERSITY 
EDUCATION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY  
 
 A.5.1 An overall picture of the vocational education. Some  background 
information 
 
In the framework of education, the further development and consolidation of the 
vocational education occupies a conspicuous place in the Government Program. In fact 
vocational  education  is  considered  to  be  a  top  priority.  The  vocational  education, 
among other things, aims at encouraging the thorough acquisition of new knowledge 
and skills, bringing the school closer and closer to the world of work, combating and 
eliminating  the  exclusion  of  youth  from  the  direct  participation  in  the  social  and 
economic life of the country, promoting life-long learning as well as the creation of 
equal opportunities for all. 
 
In line with Act no. 8872, dated. 29.03.2002, "On Vocational Education and Training in 
the Republic of Albania”, attendance at the Vocational Education schools takes place upon 
completion of the 9-year compulsory education and consists of these types and levels: 
a) Vocational  education,  typically  noted  for  its  very  practical  nature,  equips 
pupils with a range of basic and indispensable competences and skills for the 
intentions of highly qualified vocational activities in a certain profile or craft. It 
is structured around two levels: First level: lasts for 3 years (equivalent to the 3C 
category of ISCED--International Standard Classification of Education). It does not 
necessarily  end  with  a  Matura,  but  it  awards  a  certificate  of  vocational 
competences and it allows for a smooth transition or upward transfer to the 
second level of vocational education in the same profile or craft. Second level, 
which lasts for 2 years, happens as such upon completion of the first level, 
(equivalent  to  the  category  3A  of  ISCED),  ends  with  a  Matura  and  is 
accompanied  with  the  release  of  a  certificate  testifying  to  vocational 
competences and abilities. This level allows for enrolment in university studies 
in all of the branches on offer. 
b) Technical  secondary  education  (equivalent  to  category  3A  ISCED),  equips 
pupils with a general technical-managerial culture and knowledge, capable of 
organizing and steering vocational activities in a given profile or specialty. It 
lasts for 5 years (after the compulsory education) and it ends with a Matura 
and the certificate attesting to the technical-vocational competences. It allows 
students to enroll in university studies after they go through studies at such an 
educational level. 
All in all there are 40 purely technical and vocational school across the country. 
They are for the most part spread out or located in 22 districts, where students attend 
  - 26 -studies in a range of profiles and apprentices equal to 35. Out of the total number, it’s 
easy to notice that there operate in the rural areas some 3 vocational schools which are 
oriented towards the agriculture-agribusiness track. The number of students enrolled in 
the  public  technical-vocational  schools,  including  the  arts,  pedagogical,  sports  and 
foreign language track schools (termed as social-cultural ones) accounts for around 20 
%  of  the  pupils  that  attend  the  general  secondary  education.  This  figure  is 
comparatively low, taking note of the fact that in the OECD countries, this figure hovers 
around the 50 % region. What is more, this figure tends to be even higher in some other 
western developed countries.  
 
A.5.2.  Major  characteristics  and  the  significant  problems  surrounding 
Vocational Education (VE) 
 
Despite the many reforming interventions undertaken in recent years, and in 
particular with reference to the support provided by the various donors, VE in Albania, 
aside from any noteworthy positive marks of renewal or recovery, is still enjoying a 
low-profile reputation and is continuing to fall short of playing the intended role in the 
current and expected developments in the country.   
The VE today is still exhibiting the following characteristics and issues: 
-  VE  is  still  considered  today  to  be  a  “school-based  system”,  where  the 
theoretical  and  practical  preparation  of  pupils  is  fulfilled  mainly  in  the 
facilities of the vocational school and, where possible and permissible, within 
the spaces of an enterprise. 
-  The very content of vocational qualifications is varied in nature depending on 
the direction/profile and levels, but in general, it is structured as follows: (a) 
relating to the 3 year level, 34% belongs to general culture, 33 % vocational 
theory and 33 % vocational practicum and (b) for the 5 year level, 40 % turns 
out  to  be  of  general  culture,  35%  vocational  theory  and  25%  vocational 
practicum. 
-  Admission to the public vocational schools is open to almost all of the pupils 
who graduate from the compulsory education, while in separate cases, where 
demands do outnumber the supply, the admission is done on the basis of an 
entry  competition  administered  and  held  in  full  compliance  with  the 
directives  issued  by  MOES.  However  the  number  of  pupils  entering  the 
Vocational Education is lower than that in Secondary General Schools. It also 
has a direct impact in the low quality at the end of the studies. 
-  Funding for the VE comes straight from the state budget earmarked by the 
state budget for the education sector, from the local governments’ budget, the 
various projects by donors, other supporting activities as well as the revenues 
raised through the many economic activities carried out by the school and 
other resources permissible by the law.  Yet  this  funding  is  by  no  means 
adequate, if comparison is drawn with the very needs of the sector. 
  - 27 --  At the moment, in the VE system the functioning of the vocational guidance 
and  career  counseling  as  such  have  been  formally  considered  and 
appropriately envisaged; 
-  There is a lack of the pre-service training system for teachers and instructors 
of the vocational subjects and practicum. On top of this, there is not any 
special national program on the in-service training targeted at this category of 
teachers. Any training to be offered at all is of a very sporadic and erratic 
nature  coming  from  the  donors’  projects,  from  the  Regional  Educational 
Authorities  and  the  former  Institute  of  Pedagogical  Studies.  The  same 
situation holds true of any training to be held for the benefit of vocational 
school managers and headmasters.  
-  Any manor interventions worthwhile have been done at the school level and 
any  changes  to  take  place  at  the  system  level  have  been  completely 
inconsiderable; 
-  There  is  a  marked  discrepancy  among  the  vocational  schools  from  the 
financial, human resources and school facilities perspective. In general, the 
material infrastructure for the better part of vocational schools is quite poor 
and inadequate; 
-  Despite the best efforts being made at drafting any piece of legislation on VE 
and the coming into force of the new Act on VET ( March 2002) it should be 
noted that any connection or relation of the VE to the labor market and other 
social partners are increasingly poor. This is due to a number of reasons that 
relate closely to the slow pace in drafting any subsequent sub-legal acts and 
the inactivity of mechanisms as they are projected by the laws. 
-  The  VE  curriculum,  in  spite  of  any  undertakings  and  initiatives  at 
modularization and decentralization, continues to be traditional by nature 
and distanced away from the vocational realties. There is huge shortage of 
textbooks and other materials in support to the teaching and learning process; 
-  Teaching  for  the  most  part  remains  traditional  to  the  core.  This  trend  is 
negatively aided by the lack of qualification for the teaching personnel; 
-  The  process  of  pupils’  final  assessment  is  administered  by  the  schools 
themselves. In the majority of cases it lacks the effectiveness and objectivity 
especially with reference to the vocational practicum. This in turn leads to the 
low reputation surrounding the various competence certificates issued by 
most vocational schools; 
 
A.5.3. Objective goals of Vocational Education 
 
In view of the coming decade the Vocational Education (VE) should be oriented 
more and more towards a systematic reform. It should respond to the ever changing 
needs of VE in a system capable of adapting to the uncertainty and in sustainability of 
employment underpinning the changing demands of the labor markets. This reform 
  - 28 -should go beyond the purely institutional transformations and not fall short of such a 
target. As such it will call for radical changes affecting the vision, the set of attitudes 
and behaviors of all people, be they stakeholders or various social partners. 
The actual development trends in VE should be oriented towards goals that lead 
up to the establishment of a far more attractive VE, that offers access to all interested 
parties and far bigger employment opportunities allowing for transition to the higher 
levels ( ex. tertiary level). VE should be elevated is such a position as to facilitate any 
immediate reaction to the developments and the demands of the labor market at the 
regional,  national  and  local  level.  It  will  have  to  be  effective  and  be  based  on  a 
partnership model that engages in all its activities all of the stakeholders (government, 
social partners and communities). At the basis of it all should be placed the underlying 
concept of life-long learning. Such a system should help establish the opportunity for 
the accumulation, transferring and recognition of all credits gained and obtained in 
different forms and manners. Step by step it will have to fit in snugly with the level of 
qualifications already acknowledged and accepted by the European Union. 
Generally speaking, it should be pointed out that any developments in VE, being 
an  integral  part  of  Pre-university  Education,  will  be  realized  in  fine  tune  with 
Government  Program  and  the  prime  objectives  of  “National  Strategy  for  the 
Development of Pre-university Education”. The following set of objectives in VE take 
due account of the developments in recent years, not only in Albania, but also in the 
region and beyond. At the same time they make special reference to the most important 
documents published by EU that enjoy a relevance to the specific features of the VE 
sector. 
 
1.  From the structural perspective of the VE system: increasing the flexibility of the 
choice  of  offers,  admission  opportunities,  advancement  and  vertical  and  horizontal 
mobility ( among the levels and profiles) in VE, through:  
a) Establishment  of  a  National  Framework  of  Vocational  Qualifications 
(NFVQ), which will consist of:  
-  Levels of vocational qualifications and benchmarks (descriptive figures) of 
these levels from the perspective of vocational standards. 
-  Directions (profiles and apprentices) of the vocational qualifications and 
respective descriptions (standards) for each level. 
-  Evaluation criteria (testing) against the set of standards contained within 
the NFVQ. 
-  Description of Certificates for the vocational qualifications recognized at 
the national and international level.  
b) Adapting and adjusting the structure of the VE system relying mostly on NFVQ 
and taking into account the recommending levels of European Framework of 
Qualifications; 
-  Entry level into the work sector, which awards certificates on the basic 
vocational competences; 
  - 29 --  The level of qualified employee/worker, which offers certificates of the 
vocational  competences;  the  technical/managerial  level  which  offers  the 
diploma of the technical Matura. 
c) Establishment of a special cycle in order to complete the general culture of 
pupils who complete the level of the qualified worker in order to offer the 
diploma of the technical Matura; 
d) Establishment  of  the  post-secondary  vocational-oriented  cycle  for  pupils 
who complete the general secondary education and who seek to obtain a 
vocational qualification. 
 
From the quantitative viewpoint, the major indicator of expected developments 
during this period will be doubling the drawing-in rate of pupils in the vocational-
technical  and  social-cultural  schools,  from  20  %,  the  current  rate,  of  secondary 
education to about 40 % figure. 
 
2.  From the curriculum perspective of VE:  Modernizing the curricula model in 
order to align it with the demands of the labor market and increasing or raising the 
level of flexibility, though the following:  
a)  Institutionalizing the two-tier curriculum structure of VET (decentralized), with 
curricula  framework  (  as  a  national  standard  of  the  relevant  vocational 
qualification) drawn up/developed at the central level and with a school-based 
curricula, based on the respective curricula framework, on the real demands 
of the labor market and the real opportunities of schools; 
b)  The  gradual  modularization  of  the  VE  curricula  in  order  to  facilitate  the 
integration  of  vocational  competences  and  occupational  standards  and  to 
facilitate the accumulation, transferring and recognition of credits earned by 
pupils; 
c)  Institutionalizing a methodology of drafting the VE curricula that is based on the 
occupation  analysis,  which  considers  the  compilation  of  curricula  as  an 
ongoing and multi-faceted process and which commits all interested persons 
in this process. 
d)  Supporting the VE curricula with ”integral textbooks” which are to be in use 
for a relatively long period of time, by a huge number of pupils for all levels 
and directions by helping reduce considerably the costs incurred by their 
production; 
 
3.  From the institutional perspective: Development of institutional mechanisms for 
the administration of new functions and support given to the current functions of VE 
through: 
a)  Empowering the roles of National Council of VET (specialized committees and the 
respective  secretariat)  as  a  three-party  consultative  body  (government, 
  - 30 -employer, and employee) in support of developing the reforming policies on 
VET. 
b)  Establishing the National Agency of VET in order to carry out the following 
cross-sector functions. There seems to be some failure towards accomplishing 
such functions on the part of central and VET institutions. 
-  Constantly drafting and reviewing the National List of Vocations and the 
accompanying descriptions; 
-  Drafting  and  reviewing  constantly  the  NFVQ  (  with  the  description  of 
standards for all levels and profiles, the evaluation criteria and certifications); 
-  Drafting  and  reviewing  constantly  the  Curriculum  Framework  of  the 
vocational qualifications; 
-  Drafting and reviewing constantly the manual of Accreditation of institutions 
that offer vocational qualifications; 
-  Conducting the needs analysis on vocational qualifications at the national 
level; 
-  Establishing and updating the Databank in relation to NFVQ, curriculum 
framework, accreditation, needs for vocational qualifications etc, that relate to 
VET. 
c)  Empowering the Vocational School boards with social partners ( employers and 
employees); 
d)  Establishing departments ( on vocational basis) at the vocational schools, as 
units of developing and adapting the curricula at the school level, as well as 
the internal training of teachers and instructors alike; 
e)  Establishing  national  mechanism  on  the  vocational  orientation  and  career 
counseling, with the support of the social partners. 
 
4.  From the human resources perspective of VET: Building teaching and managerial  
competences of the VE personnel, through: 
-  Establishing an institutional mechanism on qualification ( pre-service ) on the 
basis of pedagogy and psychology, of new teachers and instructors of VE; 
-  Empowering the actual institutional mechanisms (at the central and school 
level) on the in-service training, both methodological and vocational of all 
teachers and instructors of VE; 
-  Empowering  the  actual  institutional  mechanisms  for  the  training  of 
vocational schools in connection with the specifics of management in this 
sector 
 
  - 31 -5.  From  the  legal-financial  perspective.  Completing  and  supplementing  the 
normative-legal framework of VE with acts, decisions, ordinances and other regulations 
with all the relevant reforming changes and transformations in this sector, through: 
-  Drafting a special Act ” The national framework of vocational qualifications”, as 
well as the sub-legal acts in support of this vital and central component to a 
modern system of VET; 
-  Establishing a legal environment for the development of non-public VE; 
-  Establishing a legal environment that allows for a bigger engagement and 
involvement of schools in economic activities, with the view to increasing 
quality in training pupils and raising additional or extra incomes. 
 
6.  From  the  infrastructure  perspective  of  VE :  Quantitative  and  qualitative 
development of the teaching environment and teaching aids in support of the projected 
qualitative and quantitative increase of the VE offer, through : 
-  Redesigning the existing facilities for the theoretical and practical teaching 
process at the vocational schools. 
-  Equipping with the necessary material and didactical basis for a theoretical 
and practical teaching process ; 
-  Establishing/opening of new schools in those regions where the demand is 
much  higher  (or  transferring  the  destination  of  some  general  secondary 
schools to vocational schools). Of course this will have to be accompanied 
with other interventions at the school level (restructuring school buildings, 
creating new workshops and renewing their equipment sources, reviewing 
the qualifications offered, changes in the school personnel). 
-  Optimizing the extent and size of schools (establishing the regional and national 
vocational schools), in order to better align the supply with the demand and to 
reduce drastically the costs of such a public service. This means that after the 
reorganization process (the end of 2008), there will be an increase in the 
number of pupils per school, from 380, the figure as it stands now, to 700-
1000 pupils. This could be made possible by way of constructions, editions, 
schools coming under the same roof, freeing up any school space encroached 
upon by use of force, as well better making use of the existing capacities. 
-  Institutionalizing cooperation among VE, vocational education and business in 
order to use in a mutual manner the infrastructure of these actors to the intent 
of better training professionally the pupils and the course attendees. 
 
All of the above and other similar reforming interventions not dealt with at the 
moment, will contribute significantly to raising quality of VE and delivering on the 
quantitative goal that over the next 4 years there will be a doubling of attendance in this 
sector.  
  - 32 -In order to better deliver on these objectives which are to stem from a more 
detailed and comprehensive analysis into the current status and the eyes set on the 
perspective, they need to be supported through concrete and realistic action plans. 
  - 33 - 
 
PART B 
 
POLICY MATRICES INCLUDING KEY ISSUES, OBJECTIVES, 
BENEFICIARIES, MONITORING INDICATORS AND TIMELINES 
 
In  this  part  are  written  down  the  major  activities,  goals,  indicators, 
benchmarks, risks, assumptions as well as the general deadlines. Information on 
this part is to be found in the relevant descriptions in part A. 
The main activities identified so far have been ranked according to their 
order of priority in order to keep in place a progressive development. The 
Matrice contains the whole range of activities and brings to light any obstacles 
hampering their fulfillment , the projected activities in reaching the set of goals 
and the monitoring indicators in order to evaluate the outcomes.  
 
B.1 GOVERNANCE: REFORMING AND STRENGTHENING 
MANAGEMENT CAPACITY: POLICY MATRIX 
 
 Key  Objectives  Beneficiaries  Monitoring indicators  Risks &  Proposed  
issue assumptions  timeline 
s 
• Clearly define job  • MOES staff  • Legislations to  • Government  • Central levels 
roles to avoid ambiguity  aware of their roles  implement PBM in MOES  Elections may  restructure to be 
• Plan and introduce  • Public aware of  approved  delay the  achieved by 2006 
PBM system  the roles of MOE  • Percentage of Central  process   
• Develop minimum  staff  departments trained and  • Appointment   • All institutes, 
standards of  • Improved  using PBM by 2006  of personnel   agencies and 
performance  services to  • Percentage of  not based on  centers affiliated 
• Develop procedures  regional MOES  educational institutions  qualification &  to MOES adopt 
to deal with non-  staff  trained and  using PBM  performance  PBM by 2007 
performers.  • Improved  by 2006  • Changing   
• Develop incentive  services to schools  • Percentage of  practices may   
schemes to encourage  and communes.  Regional  MOES units  take time  • Regional and 
e.  high levels of  • Impact on  using PBM by 2008    other levels by 
Offic performance  quality of  • Reduction in turn-   2008 
al  • Transfer the PBM to  education for  around time for decision  • Lack of MOE 
ntr regional and other  children  and actions at Central  commitment to 
Ce levels    Office  support and 
he  Through intensive  • Increased staff  obtain 
g t training develop  initiative in resolving  necessary 
n
mi capacity to use PBM to  issues.  legislative 
B.1.1 Refor manage MOES  r equirements. 
 
  - 34 -• Develop clear policy  • MOES central  • New policy  • Reluctance to  • Guidelines 
guidelines for the  MOES  staff  guidelines approved  share power  and functions to 
functions that will be  • Regional MOES  by cabinet  • Not sufficient  be decentralized 
decentralized  and LGA staff  • Percentage of  training of personnel  approved  by 
• Develop clear  • Other  identified tasks  • Lack of trust and  2006 
guidelines for the regional  stakeholders  managed through  ownership by  • 50% of 
agencies accepting the  • Parents and  DCM   stakeholders   agreed  
decentralized roles  students   • number of training  • Not fully  functioned 
• Develop capacity to  opportunities  appreciating the  decentralized 
n    use data for planning of  provided   complementarity of  by 2007 
o
ati local level.  •   central and local  • 100% of 
aliz Develop reporting and    management  agreed function 
2 entr accountability  process    responsibilities  decentralized by 
B.1.Dec wdeitphainr tamnedn tasc ross  2010 
• Develop clear policy  • School directors  • Number of school  • Communities not  • 100 selected  
guideline for School  and teachers  directors trained  ready to take on the  school function 
director and school  • PTA and local  • Number of PTA  responsibility  as autonomous 
boards   community  established and  •  School director  schools by 2006 
• Develop capacity to  • LGA and other  actively supporting  and LGA manager  • 50 % of all 
prepare school  stakeholders  the school  not fully trained   school 
development plans    • Number of school  • Funding  functioning a s 
• Establish PTA and    development plans  mechanism not  autonomous 
encourage parents and  submitted  targeted well  entities by 2010 
community ownership of  • National  • LGA not willing to  • 100% of 
schools  benchmarking  allocate agreed funds  schools are 
my  • Develop quality  • Number of  to schools.  either fully or 
o
n accountability systems  Commune leaders  partly 
o
ut • Establish external  trained  autonomous by 
A
1.3 hool  bate anlcl hlemvaerlsk -king of quality  2 015. 
B.Sc   
• Develop policy  
• Managers and  • Level of infra- • Inadequate  • EMIS at 
framework for EMIS 
Policy developers    structure and  infrastructure and  Central fully  
Design 
at Central MOES  equipment in place.  equipment  functional by 
• Develop systems 
2006 
specification and support   • Managers and  • Extent of training  • Not enough and 
• Identify types of data to  Policy developers    provided to technical  not specialized  • EMIS 
be collected and at which  at Central Regional  staff  training provided to  functional at 
m  locations  MOES  and LGA  local personnel.  50% of schools 
Syste • Develop access levels  •  Planning and  •pr oEvxidteendt  toof  tthraei ning    and regional 
on  and authorization  budgeting officers  professional staff  offices  by 2008 
ati procedures    • EMIS 
m • Develop analysis and  • Quality  • Quality of data 
or   functional at 
nt Inf rreesppoortninsgib pler odceepdaurrtemse anntsd    monitoring people  being collected  100% of schools 
e   • Types of analysis  and regional 
m • Intensive staff 
e performed  offices  by 2010 
g developing and 
a
n
a specialized training   • Quality of data 
M
al     driven reports 
n
o prepared for policy 
4  cati development 
B.1. Edu  
 
  - 35 -• Develop staff appraisal  • MOES staff  • Structure and  • Agreeing on  • Staff and 
systems with provision  guidelines for   objective indicators of  organizational 
• Unions and other 
for appeals  monitoring formal  quality    units’ appraisal 
professional 
adopted by MOES  guidelines 
• Develop multiple level  associations  • Fear of retribution 
approved and 
of reporting on staff  • Rigor and quality of  for reporting low 
• Regional MOES  adopted by 
performance  self evaluation report  quality and 
and LGA staff  2006.  
of departments  performance levels 
e  • Develop evidence 
nc • School Directors  • 50% of 
a based appraisal system  • External audit  by   
ur and teachers  supervisors and 
s the MOES 
As • Bench mark MOES    HOD’s adopt 
uality  pmeinrfiosrtrmieasn acned w ith other  •  General public    tQhAe  nbeyw 2 0S0A8  and 
Q
d  international best  • 100% of 
n
a practices. 
g  supervisors and 
n
5  orti   HOD’s adopt 
B.1. Rep tQhAe  nbeyw 2 0S1A0  and 
 
B.2 IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF THE TEACHING AND 
LEARNING PROCESS: POLICY MATRIX 
  - 36 -Key  Objectives   Beneficiaries   Monitoring  Risks &  Proposed  
issue indicators  assumptions  timeline 
s  
• Develop a Comprehensive  • MOES, and  • Cross sector  • Lack of  • NCF 
National Curriculum Frame- NSSED  debates of National  capacity and/or  developed an 
work  planners  Curriculum  commitment by  approved  by 
• Structure of pre-university  • Educational  framework.  CDC to lead the  2005 
education with appropriate  institutes  • National  curriculum  • Primary syllabi 
learning goals  involved with pre  Curriculum  reform.  developed, tried 
• Rationalize subjects and  university  Framework  • Continue to  and implemented 
hours for grade levels  education  developed and  stay with familiar  by 2010 
(workload).   • Curriculum  adopted by the Govt.  concepts and  • Secondary 
• Develop policies to guide  Development  • New list of subject  approaches  syllabi developed 
design of student choice and  Center  and hrs per subject  • Tension  tried and 
inclusive education  • Teachers and  for each grade  caused by  implemented by 
ent  •re vDiseivnegl o spu nbejewc ts cyollnatbei nbty a nd  secdhuocoalt idoinre  ctors  daepvperolovpeedd  and  tsruabdjieticotn bael ing  2015. 
m
p map vertical and horizontal  • Students and  • New subject syllabi  combined can 
o
el articulation  Parents   -content and process   lead to 
v
De • Develop policy and  • NGO and  developed and  disengaging 
m  processes to articulate basic  INGO involved  approved, tried and  from the reform. 
u
B.2.1  Curricul eedduuccaattiioonn  ipnatoth vwoacya tional  iinn ncouvraritciounlusm    i  mplemented  
• Develop capacity to  • EMIS,PAPD  • EMIS data based  • Lack of  • Teacher 
forecast teacher demands   MOES   established and  commitment and  Development 
• Strengthening Teacher  • Teacher  report on 1 region’s  willingness to  Agency  jobs 
Development Agency  Development  demand and supply   undertake the  roles defined and 
• Review Teacher Training   agency   • Clear job roles for  task.  staff appointed 
Curriculum for content and  •  School  TA written and  • Lack of   by 2006 
process  Directors and  people appointed on  understanding of   
• Review conditions for  Teachers  merit  the latest  • Teacher 
employment for teachers  • Providers of  • PBM adopted and  research in  competencies for 
• Consider new and  Teacher training  12 monthly  teacher  different levels 
alternative models of teacher  •  School and  appraisals  development   and subjects 
training  disadvantaged   conducted.  • Obtaining  developed by  
• Quality assurance and  communities  • Teacher  legislative  2006 
teacher accreditation.  • Parents and  competencies plus  approval for  • Teacher pre 
• In-service training and  Students  degree programs  teacher  and in-service 
Professional Networks    developed and  accreditation,  programs 
    approved  merit based  developed, 
  • Accreditation   remunerations  approved and 
board established  etc in time.  running by 2006 
nt  and processing  Upgrading all  • Teacher 
e existing teachers  current teachers  accreditation and 
m
p accreditation  with knowledge  merit based 
o
el Minimum of 5 teacher  and skills to  remuneration 
v
De professional  implement the  approved and 
er  association  new curriculum.  operational by 
2.2 ach established and is  2010 
B.Te  operational 
 
  - 37 -• Review selection  • Student and  • Policy and  • Authors  • New policy of 
of content and  teachers   procedures for  reluctant discard  textbook design and 
instructional design  • Textbook authors  textbook  previous books.  production 
• Coordinating the  • MOES planners  development  • Lack of  approved 2006 
demand and supply  • MOES and  approved.  appreciation of  • EMIS report 
of textbooks  Regional offices  • Training for  the significance of  summaries the 
• Managing supply  •  Publishing  textbook authors  instructional  demand for 
and demand of  companies  provided  design.  textbook  by 2006 
nt  alternative textbooks  • School Directors  • Textbook data  • Opposition form  • First batch of 
e
m • Privatization of  and Parents   linked to EMIS  publishing house  textbooks process 
p
elo textbook publishing  • Policy and  to stop annual  and approved for  
ev • Develop  procedures for cost  print runs  printing 2007 
D
k  mechanism for cost  recovery approved.  • Resistance to  • Negotiation on 
o
o recovery of textbooks    pay for books   cost recovery 
2.3 extb   finalized and pilot 
B. T by 2008 
• Develop minimum  • Student and  • Training for  • Inability to  • Policy on 
standards for  teachers   alternative resource  control for quality  alternative textbook 
reference library  • Textbook authors  developers provided  and relevance.  and resources 
s  • Develop minimum  • MOES and  • Policy and  • School  approved 2006 
e
urc standards for  Regional offices  procedures for  management not  • Minimum list of 
so numbers and type of  •  Publishing and IT  alternative books  appreciative of  alternative 
e
R alternative textbooks,  companies  approved.  the needs for  resources prepared 
g 
n CD ROM etc.  • School Directors  • Policy and  additional  and circulated 2006 
hi
ac • Develop policies  and Parents  procedures for  resources  • 30% of schools 
Te for school library.  school libraries and  • .Maintenance  have good alternate 
ve  • Develop policy for  internet services  cost for  books and learning 
B.2.4  Alternati uressee oafr cInht etornoel. t as a  da epvperolovpeedd.  and  cInnootmet rbpnuuedtteg sresyt seatden.md  s  r esources. 
• Strengthening  • NCEA staff,  •  NCEA staff  •  Lack of  • Training to build 
NCEA capacity to  • Parents and  trained in  sufficient  capacity conducted 
effective carry out its  Students   educational  understanding of  by 2005 
functions  • Universities and  assessment and  educational  • Design and Trial  
• Develop policies  other post  monitoring  assessment  grade 9  National 
and procedures for   secondary  • Design and Pilot  • Inability to  exam 2006, full 
Monitoring &  institutions  national examination  assure public the  implementation by 
Benchmarking  • School Directors,  for  Grade 9  for the  reliability and  2008 
• Develop NCEA’s  Local Government  new curriculum  integrity of  • Common Matura 
capacity to develop,  • MOES quality  • Develop policy  examination  exam agreement  
conduct national   assessment.  and procedure to  •  Inability to  by 2006 
moderation  and  develop Matura  negotiate with  • Participate in 
benchmarking  examinations  universities to  regional 
• Develop rigorous  • Formal agreement  have a common  benchmarking  by 
and trustworthy  with universities and  Matura   2007  
g   national exams for  other post secondary  Lack of  • Design and trial  
n
ori grade 9 for leaving  institutions to use a  transparent and   grade 9  national 
nit compulsory  single exam for  defensible  exam 2010, full 
o
M education plus the  university entrance.  analysis and  implementation by 
n &  Matura exams  reports.  2011 
atio Develop NCEA’s   
n capacity to develop, 
5  mi
2.a conduct international 
B.Ex benchmarking 
 
  - 38 - 
B.3 FINANCING PRE-UNIVERSITY EDUCATION: POLICY 
MATRIX 
 
Key  Objectives   Beneficiaries   Monitoring indicators  Risks &  Proposed  
issue assumptions  timeline 
s  
• MOF, MOES and the  • MOES, MOF  • Percentage  • MOF’s  • The specific 
LG to develop a  and LG  contributions  reluctance to  financial items 
y  transparent and detailed  • School  determined  disclose detail  needs by MOES 
ersit description of financial  boards and  • The process of  funding information   for planning and 
v
ni contributions made by  communes  recording this  identified  by 
u
e  each stakeholder    information formally  2005 
e pr • Separate sectorial  adopted as a  • The reporting 
n of thudget faunndd binyg  cino nthdeiti obnloacl ka gnrda nt  permanent activity.   pbreotwceedeunr eM OF 
sitioon bunconditional budget.  and MOES 
1  poati agreed and 
3.muc formally adopted 
B. Coed 2006  
• Disaggregate block  • MOES  • Timeline for MOES  • Data not readily  • Detailed 
grants into MOES  central and  and MOF formally  available could  breakdown and  
specific activities as line  regional  agreed   delay the process  transparent 
items  finance  • New budget report  • Reluctance to  budget reporting 
• Increase flexibility and  directorate  guidelines develop and  include line items  adopted by 2006 
equity of the funding mo- • Schools and  adopted  in the budget  • LG budget 
del by considering  Regions  • Report on implication  • Comprehensive  contribution 
carefully developed per- •  Education  of a per capita model of  per-capita model  made detailed 
capita funding model  finance  funding    may  not achieve  and transparent  
• Review the LG share  managers  • LG budget reporting  necessary  2006 
of education funding and   • Finance  procedures changes  consensus  • Decentralized 
process of accountability  management   and implements   • Increased  functions 
to ensure regular  auditors and  • Revised agreement  transparency of LG  devolved by 
maintenance is carried  MOF  on functions to be  planned and actual    2007 
out   • All education  decentralized   spending may be  • New per 
• Review centrally  stakeholders  • New transparent and   viewed  capita model of 
managed recurrent    cross audited  unfavorably by LG  funding 
expenditure in light of    accountability and  • Disagreement  developed and 
decentralization    reporting systems  on functions that  debated  2007 
• Detailed review of  approved  ought to be  • Comprehensiv
ds  accountability process to  •  Detailed training on  decentralized  e, detailed and 
n
u increase transparency  specific aspects  • Sufficient  transparent 
F
et  and efficiency in the  provided.  detailed training  funding and 
g
d system  not provided at  accounting 
u
B • Comprehensive  appropriate times  system adopted 
sfer  training in Budget  by MOES 2010 
n
a planning management 
Tr
o  and reporting. 
s t
nt
e
2  um
B. 3.nstr
I 
 
  - 39 -• Communication and  •  MOF, MOES  • Agreed  • Reluctance to  • Formal 
information sharing  •  Interdepartment  information types  share information  agreement on 
• Attracting Non-public  within MOES  and process of  • Delays  caused  what information 
funding into per  •  MOES and LG  reporting   by  govt elections  and how it will be 
university education  •  MOES,LG and  • MOES  and parliament  shared approved  
• Approving and /or  community  approved policy  procedures  by 2006 
amending  legislations  •  MOF, MOES,  guidelines for  • Lack of ability to  • Revised tax 
to encourage School  Teacher and School  supporting and  monitor tax  policy for 
Raising Funds  Directors  managing non  exempts may deter  education 
or  • Negotiating Tax  •  MOES and other  public funded  considering this  investments and 
ect Exempts for educational  sub-sectors in  education.  option  school fund 
b- s investment.   education  •  Approved tax  • Sub-sectors  raining approved 
su • Through Public  exemptions and  unable to agree on  by 2008 
he  dialogue agree on  approved policy  terms of  • Redistribution 
n t reallocation of education  guidelines for  redistribution of  of public funds 
cy i Funds  schools to raise  funds.  within the 
n
e   funds     education sector 
ci
Effi •  Legislations    agreed and 
g  adopted for    approved by 
n
si redistribution of  2008. 
B.3.3 Increa pfuunbdlisc  sector   
  Capital works-  • MOES central and  • Minimum  • Lack of capacity  •  Maintenance 
• Review and prioritize  regional  standard for  at local level to  guidelines 
maintenance and  • LG, Communes  maintenance  undertake the  developed and 
rehabilitations   Teachers and  developed and  tasks   monitors by 2006 
• Develop transparent   students  adopted   • Not willing to be  •  School mapping 
system to monitor LG  • Teachers and  • System of  subjected to public  completed and 
investment contributions  students   monitoring and  scrutiny  adopted by 2010 
• Consider school    managing regular  • Commune and  • First round of 
mapping report before  LG contribution  parent oppose  school based 
s 
e planning new schools  for maintenance  consolidation of  innovation funded 
m
m Special  project-  • Policy  schools  by 2006. 
a
gr • School based  guidelines and  • Lack of   
o
Pr research to develop  funding process  confidence in   
nt  innovative practices.  approved to  school teachers to   
e
m   promote school  be innovative 
4 st
B.3.Inve binansoevda tions.   
• Develop roles and  • MOES ( finance  • Number of  • Not willing to  • Mentoring 
responsibilities between  section)  mentor/mentee  accept mutual  systems 
g   mentor and mentee for  • Educational   agreement  responsibilities for  established by 
n
orti supporting with new  institutes and  reached   making the new  2006 
p concepts and  agencies  • Number of  finance  • School cluster 
p
Su processes.  • Schools and  cluster group and  management work.  and Regional 
nd  • Develop roles and  communes  office networks  • Power  networks 
a
g  responsibilities for  • Number of  relationship  established by 
n
3.5  entori cMluOsEteSr  sRcehgoioonlsa al onfdfi cfoer   mof etheetin agb foovre e ach  iimntpelrefemrienngt awtiiothn .   2007 
B.M networks   
 
  - 40 -B4   CAPACITY BUILDING AND HUMAN RESOURCE 
DEVELOPMENT—THE CONCEPTUAL SHIFT  
 
Key  Objectives   Beneficiaries   Monitoring indicators  Risks &  Proposed  
issue assumptions  timeline 
s  
• Engage others sectors in  •  Parents and  • Cross sector  •  Other  • Guidelines for 
planning per university  students  ministerial advisory  sectors unwilling  cross sector 
education  •  Planners in  committee established  to engage  engagement 
ce   •  Develop national  all  line  • Conduct cross sector  •  Education  approves by 2006. 
ervi ownership of the education  ministries  debates and discussion  experts not   
or S reform  •  Community  forums   willing to share   
ct • Develop education as a  and economic  planning with 
e
S tool to support national  stakeholders  other sectors 
4.1  oss  economic and social  •  MOES and   
B.Cr development  LG   
• Develop public  • MOES  •  Conduct public  • Reluctance to  • Initial forums 
consciousness that quality  Central and  forum to debate at  share with  established in 2006 
and quantity of schools  Regional  national level  adjacent  • Provisional 
s 
ol have cost  • School  •  Conduct public  regions/  discussion paper 
o
ch • Quality education may  directors and  forum to debate at local    Communes  developed 2007 
s
g  need to over-ride local  teachers   government  level  •  Not 
n
zi government boundaries.  • Parents and    appreciating the 
nali • Review National and  students  value of quality 
4.2 atio Local objectives to meet    over quality  
B. R equity and access.   
• Educate inspectors to  • Inspectors at  • Performance profiles  • Inspectors not  • Inspectors 
assist rather then control  Central and  of inspectors  appreciating the  training in 2006 
and reprimand.   Regional MOES  • Feedback for school  need for change  • Other training in 
n 
atio • Develop trust through  • Staff involved  director and teachers.  • Teachers and  self reporting 2006 
cilit the above approach to  in self reporting  school director  • Evaluate 
a promote honesty in  self- process  not trusting to  inspectors 
F
s.  reporting     report honestly.  performance 
v
n      directly and 
o
3 ecti   indirectly ( self 
B.4.Insp r2e0p0o7r ting by others) 
 
  - 41 -• Bring respectability  • School Director  •   Discussion paper of  • Governments  • Teacher job 
to teaching by  and Teachers  teacher job evaluation   inability to provide  evaluation 
making it a full time  • Students and  •   Legislation to include  civil service  concluded by 
profession.  parents.  teachers as civil services  condition to all  2006 
• Conditions of  • MOES through  •   Number of teacher  teachers  • Legislation 
s  teacher to match  efficiency  networks and association  • Increased  adopted by 
er those of other civil  achieved by multi- for pre university  workload without  2008 
h
ac servants  skilling  education.  corresponding 
e
T •  Diversity teacher  increase in salary 
n of  competency to make 
atio them multi-skilled 
s • Support the 
ali
n establishment of 
o
si teachers association 
4  es
4.of to share professional 
B.Pr experiences.  
• To empower  • MOES and the  • Public discussion on  • Reluctance to  • Public forum/ 
curriculum experts to   G o A.  subject  accept a major  discussions 
map the actual  • IPS and the  reconceptualisation  change  completed by 
knowledge and skills  Curriculum  • Number of reconstituted  • Resistance to  2006 
d  need and not be  Development  subjects   changing subjects  • New 
n
s a guided by old  Center  •   Number of  content by local  structure and 
ve subjects  •  Students and  reconstituted textbooks   experts  content 
cti • Consolidate  parents    • Public not  developed and 
e
um Elation nanudm cboenr soef qsuuebnjetlcyt   •sp Uecniiavleizrastitioy n  •    urantdioenrastlea nfodrin tgh eth e  a2d0o1p0t efodr   bbays ic 
B.4.5   CurriculSpecializntceluaxmstbsboreoorok omsf  sat ennadec ehdeerds,.     c  hanges.  esedc aonndd a2r0y1  5  for 
• All policy  • MOES central  • Number of commission  • Lack of capacity  • Identify all 
developed had to be  and Regional  research studies  to undertake  research 
y  supported and  • PAPD and  • Number of policy paper  rigorous empirical  studies 
c
oli justified through good  EMIS  developed  studies  currently 
P
n  data.  departments  • Number of NGOs and  • Lack of funds to  underway in the 
e
Driv • New concepts and  • Other  INGO projects integrated  support research  sector by   
a  systems need  Educational  into MOESs  education  studies and  2006 
at research and piloting  institutions  strategy  piloting.  • Adopt  policy 
D
nd nt before national  affiliated to MOES  and procedures 
h ameadoption.   • NGOs and  to undertake 
B.4.6   ResearcDevelop  ItshNeeGc teOodr .uw coartkioinng  in  cr2eo0sm0e7ma ricshs iobny  
 
  - 42 - 
 
PART C 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
 
 
This  section  maps  out  the  sequencing  and  approximate  timing  for  the 
implementation of various activities noted in sections A and B, above. In accord with 
the adopted format for National Education Strategy each of the 4 priority areas have 
been dealt with separately, mapping key activities along respective timelines. It must be 
noted that a National Education Strategy is a macro level document and hence is not 
able to deal with micro level details of all activities and associated procedures. Further 
operational plans with details for each activity will need to be developed as specific 
project designs are undertaken.  
The proposed schedule assumes that implementation of the strategy will begin in 
year 2005. If for some reason there happens to be a delay the schedule can be pushed 
back by a corresponding period of time. It is important to maintain the sequence of 
activities as many are planned for progressively upgrading. 
 
 
 
  - 43 -C 1.  Governance: Reforming and Strengthening management capacity   
Activity  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015 
C1.1 Reforming the Central Office                                   
Developing clear job roles                                  
Develop minimum performance levels                                  
Develop incentive schemes/ high performers                                  
Procedures manual for managing  PBM                                  
Transfer PBM to Institutes                                   
Transfer PBM to regional  and school                                  
Intensive training to support the changes                                  
                                  
C1.2 Decentralization                                   
Guidelines and functions to be decentralized                                  
Clear roles and responsibilities                                   
Processes and procedure for report and QA                                  
Pilot a vertical section of MOES management                                  
Training other regional/commune/school staff                                  
50% of agreed functions decentralized nationally                                  
100% or agreed functions decentralized nationally                                   
                                   
C1.3 School Autonomy                                  
Develop guidelines for new roles of Directors                                  
Develop new roles for PTA and school boards                                  
Develop reporting and accountability processes                                  
Intensive training for school Directors                                  
Pilot School Autonomy                                  
100 pilot school functioning as autonomous                                  
50% of all schools as autonomous                                  
100% of all schools as autonomous                                  
                                  
C1.4 Education Management Information System                                  
Develop framework for EMIS                                  
Appraise and negotiate infrastructure capacity                                  
  - 44 -Identify and procure necessary equipment                                  
Pilot and Train data input staff                                  
Pilot and Train data analysis and reporting                                   
EMIS operating at Central & Institutes level                                  
EMIS piloted in 100 schools                                  
EMIS operating at 50% of regional & school level                                  
EMIS operating at 100% of regional & school level                                  
                                   
C1.5 Reporting and Quality Assurance                                   
Develop new indicators of quality                                  
Developing a reporting guidelines                                  
Train Supervisors & Directors in new procedures.                                   
                                   
 
  - 45 - 
C 2. Improving the Quality of Teaching and Learning Processes   
Activity  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015 
C2.1 Curriculum Development                                   
Develop a National Curriculum Framework                                  
Develop policy guidelines to implement NCF                                  
Develop primary syllabi based on the NCF                                  
Prepare teachers guide for new primary syllabi                                  
Pilot new curriculum for grades 1-9                                  
Train teachers to use the new curriculum                                  
National implementation for new Pri. curriculum                                  
Develop secondary syllabi based on the NCF                                  
Prepare teachers guide for new Sec. curriculum                                  
Pilot new curriculum for grades 10-12                                  
Train teachers to use the new Sec. curriculum                                  
National implementation of new Sec. curriculum.                                  
                                   
C2.2Teacher Development                                   
Develop system for teacher data on EMIS                                  
Strengthen Teacher Development Agencies                                  
Review & enhance teacher training curriculum                                  
Review teacher employment conditions                                  
Review teacher in-service and PD training                                   
Develop teacher accreditation and QA                                  
                                   
C2.3  Text Book Development                                  
Develop process to map new content in textbooks                                  
Link textbook demand with EMIS system                                  
Pilot privatization of textbook development                                  
Pilot cost recovery of small set of textbooks                                  
Scale up privatization and cost recovery                                  
Training  textbook writers                                  
  - 46 -Textbooks for grades 1-9 supplied                                  
Textbooks for grades 10-12 supplied                                  
                       
C2.4  Alternative Teaching Resources                                  
Develop policy for school libraries                                  
Develop policy for alternative textbooks                                  
Develop policies for computers in schools                                  
Train Teachers/Directors to use alter. resources                                  
Procure minimum alternative resources for Sch.                                  
30% of school have alternative resources                                   
                                  
C2.5 Examination and Monitoring                                   
Strengthen NCAE capacity                                  
Develop clear roles and functions for NCAE                                  
Develop indicators and benchmarks                                   
Pilot 3 subjects in grades 9&11 national exams                                  
Pilot national monitoring processes                                  
Develop national exams for  grades 1-9                                  
Develop exams for secondary education                                   
Develop half year monitoring report                                  
Train local experts                                   
                                   
 
  - 47 - 
C 3. Financing Pre-University  Education  
Activity  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015 
C3.1 Review composition of pre university budget                                   
Develop transparent financial model                                  
Separate each stakeholder contribution                                   
Separate block grants into sectorial funding                                  
Separate conditional and unconditional funds                                  
Review percentage distribution in the sector                                  
                                   
C3.2  Instruments to Transfer  Budget Funds                                  
Disaggregate block grants into line items                                  
Develop per-capita funding models                                  
Develop accountability of LG funds                                   
Develop mechanism for decentralizing funding                                   
Develop monitoring& accounting of funding                                   
Comprehensive training at all levels                                  
                                   
C3.3  Increasing Efficiency in the sub sector                                   
 Develop system for sharing finance information                                  
Attract private sector funds                                  
Develop legislation to encourage schools collect funds                                  
Negotiate tax exemption for education investments                                  
Develop process to engage public in education funding                                  
 
C3.4  Review Investment programs                                  
Prioritize refurbishment and building                                  
Develop maintenance funding model                                  
Develop legislation to encourage direct investment                                  
Schools  to plan investment projects                                  
                       
C3.5 Mentoring and Supporting                                   
Train mentors to work at MOES levels                                   
  - 48 -Train mentors to work at Regional levels                                  
Train mentors to work at Regional levels                                  
                                   
 
  - 49 - 
C.4  Capacity Building and Human Resource Development  
Activity  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015 
C4.1 Cross Sector Service                                   
Establish cross sector advisory team                                  
Public awareness and ownership                                   
                                   
C4.2  Rationalizing Schools                                  
Establish process for school rationalization                                  
Develop national focus for education reform                                  
Develop process to ensure equity and access                                  
Adoption of school rationalization                                  
                                   
C4.3  Inspection vs. Facilitation                                  
Develop new roles as facilitators                                  
Develop professionalism and trust                                  
Intensive training of  school inspectors in new roles                                  
                                   
C4.4  Professionalisation of Teachers                                  
Redesign Teaching as fulltime profession                                  
Review teacher condition to match civil servants                                   
Diversify teacher competencies                                  
Establish and support teacher Prof. associations                                  
                                  
C4.5 Curriculum elective and specializations                                  
Develop curriculum to reflect every needs                                  
Consolidate subjects to increase learning time                                   
Train CD experts to undertake the above task                                  
                                  
C4.6  Research Data Driven Policy Development                                  
Develop process for data driven policy making                                  
Develop capacity to use data to test new ideas                                  
Train PAPD staff in data analysis and reporting                                   
  - 50 - 
PART D 
SUMMARY OF COST ESTIMATES 
 
The cost estimates were developed on the basis of approximate units costs 
aggregated from previous similar activities undertaken by MOES, Institute for 
Curriculum Development, local NGO’s and INGO’s. While such information provided 
some basis to estimate costs it must be noted that these figures are still very crude. Thus 
the estimates provided in the summary should be treated cautiously.     
The computation of costs is based on the following assumptions; 
1)  Foreign Technical Assistance (FTA) input is USD $800 per day. This includes 
travel, accommodation, Perdiem and fees. 
2)  Local expert input is USD150 per day. This includes travel, accommodation, 
Perdiem and fees.  
3)  Local participants will be paid a lump-sum basis a sum of USD$50 per day. 
The lump-sum payment will include, travel, accommodation and Perdiem. 
4)  Costs for room hire, rental of equipment and other incidentals associated with 
conducting workshops/training etc are not factored into the costing presented here. 
Neither is any inflationary cost or variation that may occur due to the fluctuation of the 
USD.  
To appreciate the cost calculation process see Part E. It provides a narrative 
against the resource input matrices which in turn guides the process of establishing cost 
estimates. An aggregate cost for activities noted under each of the key areas of the 
national strategy is presented below: 
 
D.1  GOVERNANCE: REFORMING AND STRENGTHENING 
MANAGEMENT CAPACITY 
 
D.1.1 Reforming the Central Office………………………………288,000  
D.1.2 Decentralization…………………………………………….282,750 
D.1.3 School Autonomy…………………………………………..738,000 
D.1.4 Educational Management Information System…………….176,000 
D.1.5  Reporting and Quality Assurance…………………………  60,000 
TOTAL                                                         1,544,750 
 
 
  50D.2  IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF THE TEACHING AND 
LEARNING PROCESS 
 
D.2.1 Curriculum Development……………………………….4,155,000 
D.2.2 Teacher Development……………………………………1,683,000 
D.2.3 Textbook Development………………………………….4,597,000 
D.2.4  Alternative Teaching Resources…………………………1,069,000 
D.2.5 Examinations and Monitoring…………………………...1,274,000 
TOTAL                                                                                        12,778,000 
 
D.3 FINANCING PRE-UNIVERSITY EDUCATION 
 
D.3.1 Composition of Education Finance………………………..176,000  
D.3.2 Instruments and Processes for Transfer of Funds…………150,500 
D.3.3 Increasing Efficiency in the Sub-sector Funding…………   63,500 
D.3.4 Investment Program…………………………………  185,624,660 
D.3.5 Mentoring and Support Systems……………………………84,500  
TOTAL                                                       86, 099,160 
 
D.4 CAPACITY BUILDING AND HUMAN RESOURCE 
DEVELOPMENT A CONCEPTUAL SHIFT 
 
D.4.1 Education as Cross-Sector Service……………………………44,250 
D.4.2 Rationalization of School Distribution………………………..99,000 
D.4.3 Inspection vs. Facilitation……………………………………...34,230 
D.4.4 Professionalisation of Teaching.................................................85,000 
D.4.5  Curriculum Electives and Specializations……………………..66,500 
D.4.6 Research-based and Data-driven Policy Development............139,500 
TOTAL                                                             $467,480 
 
The estimated total cost over the ten years to implement the reforms will cost  
USD$ 200 889 390 over the next 10 years.  It must be noted that substantial part of 
this sum is for capital works such as school rehabilitation. 
 
  51 
 
PART E 
RESOURCE INPUT MATRICES 
 
The information in the matrices is organized in the following manner: 
 
1.  Major considerations for determining the costs are listed as heading for the 
various columns. 
2.  Many of the activities and the expected outcomes overlap thus shading is used to 
group activities, consulting inputs, seminar/workshop and numbers of 
participants etc. For example, in Appendix E 1, the FTA and Local Experts have 
12 and 24 months input respectively, to undertake all tasks that are shaded. 
Similarly, in the same matrix, the number of people participating in the training 
program is grouped in 2 lots of 20 people by respective shadings. 
3.  The time allocated for each activity is minimum total time. How this time is 
distribution to achieve the objectives is to be determined when preparing 
detailed design of each individual activity. However, the minimum time noted is 
critical if sufficient level of proficiency is to be achieved. It is assumed that the 
proposed minimum training is necessary to begin the reform process and which 
will get integrated into the daily activities of MOES and supported through 
MOES grants as professional development for continuous improvement. 
4.  The resource/equipment noted in the matrix includes only the very essential 
items. A lack of accurate data on what was available within the sub-sector and 
often conflicting data made it difficult to be very precise. Nevertheless, we 
believe that all significant resource data that impact on the implementation of the 
National Education Strategy is covered.  
5.  The number of workshops, training seminars is also indicative only and kept to 
minimum requirement. The proposed numbers were decided to ensure 
reasonable levels of engagement from all levels and all stakeholders. 
6.  The numbers of participants expected to be involved in specific seminars and the 
departments and levels of the departments that should be represented noted in 
the matrix to ensure people that are directly related to performing the necessary 
tasks attend the training.  
7.  The rows aligned to each activity heading present a summary of input for each 
activity and under the cost estimate the total cost for that activity is noted. This 
amount is transferred to the cost summary in section D.  
 
 
  52This section provides a narrative to describe the assumptions used to map and calculate 
the costs: 
 
1 The need to for international and local experts with specialized technical 
assistance is deemed critical for successful implementation of the project. The additional 
funding is necessary to either buy time of current staff and/or appoint new staff to 
work intensively on the reform activities. Previous experience in Albania and other 
developing countries have shown that existing MOES staffs when asked to take on 
additional tasks related to education reform are reluctant as it is often an overload. Such 
overloaded workers are unable to deliver on their TOR and put the reform activities at 
risk. 
2 Training and Capacity building  
Minimum number of training days allocated for the activity ÷ by proposed 
number of workshops = days for each workshop  
Days for each workshop × by the number of participants = number of days. 
Number of days x USD50 per day = total cost for the activity 
 
3 Rehabilitation costs  
Estimates were made on the basis of work undertaken under the WB Credit 3343-
ALB which finished in 2004. 
 
44 school were rehabilitated a cost of USD$ 6,000, 000 (approx) 
Average cost per schools = USD$ 136, 366 (approx) 
40% of schools not rehabilitated yet = 1360 schools 
 
Therefore, total cost for rehabilitating 1360 schools = USD$ 185, 457, 760 to be 
spread over 10 years 
 
4 Textbook costs were provided by the textbook specialist in MOES. A unit cost 
of approx USD$1.00 was suggest for books in the primary grades. It includes the design, 
development and publishing costs. However, in the absence of any recent costs for 
compulsory and secondary text books the above unit cost was used to estimate the 
government share of funding the textbook for pre-university grades. Thus is it 
important that the total costs for textbook be treated with caution and be reviewed 
when more accurate units cost data is available. 
 
  53 
E 1.  Governance: Reforming and Strengthening management capacity- Resource input matrix   
Resources 
Foreign  Local  Training  &  Number of  # of People  Department  Costs 
Activity  T/A  Experts  Programs  Equipment  Workshops  Involved  Responsible  Estimates 
E1.1 Reforming the Central Office   12 mths   24 mths   9 weeks     9 Wshops  96 people    288000 
Developing clear job roles  12 mths   24 mths  2 weeks     2 workshops  20 people   MOES  269000 
Develop minimum performance levels                        
Develop incentive schemes/ high performers                        
Procedures manual for managing  PBM                        
Transfer PBM to Institutes         2 weeks     2 wkshops  36 people     9000 
Transfer PBM to Regional & Schools                    MOES   
Intensive training to support the changes        5 weeks     5 wkshops  40 people  Regional  10000 
                         
E1.2 Decentralisation   12 mths  24 mths  13 weeks     26wkshops  150 people    282,750 
 
Guidelines and functions to be decentralised  12mths  24mths             264000 
Clear roles and responsibilities                         
Processes and procedure for report and QA                       
Pilot a vertical section of MOES management                    MOES, LG   
Schools, 
Training other regional/commune/school staff        13 weeks     26 wkshops  150 people  PTA  18,750 
                         
E1.3  School Autonomy  6 mths  24mths  18 weeks      26wkshops  2700    738,000 
 
Develop guidelines for new roles of Directors  6 mths  24mths                 168000 
Develop new roles for PTA and school boards                        
Develop reporting and accountability processes                        
Intensive training for school Directors        13 weeks      13 wkshops  2000  LG, School,   500000 
Pilot 100 School Autonomy        5 weeks     13 wkshops  700  PTA  70000 
                         
E1.4  Education Management Information System  7 mths  18 mths  12 weeks     19 wkshops  60 people    176,000 
Develop framework for EMIS  6mths  12 mths                 132000 
Appraise and negotiate infrastructure capacity                        
Identify and procure necessary equipment                        
 Pilot and Train data input staff  1 mth  6 mths  6 weeks     13 wkshops  40 people  MOES, LG        39000 
Pilot and Train data analysis and reporting         6 weeks     6 wkshops  20 people  Regional &  5000 
EMIS operating at Central & Institutes level                    Schools   
EMIS piloted in 100 schools                        
                         
C1.5 Reporting and Quality Assurance   2 mths  6 mths  5weeks     13 wkshops  100 people    60000 
Develop new indicators of quality  2 mths  6 mths                 50000 
Developing a reporting guidelines                    LG, Regional   
Train Supervisors & Directors in new procedures.         5 weeks     13 wkshops  100 people  Schools  10000 
  
                 1,544,750 
 
  
E 2. Improving the Quality of Teaching and Learning Processes - Resource input matrix  
Training  Department 
Foreign  Local  Program Resoures &  Number of  # of People  Responsibl Costs 
Activity  T/A  Experts  s  Equipment  Workshops  Involved  e  Estimates 
E2.1 Curriculum Development   9 mths   18 mths   14 weeks     30 wkshops   20020     4,155,000 
 
Develop a National Curriculum Framework  3mths     2 weeks     4 wkshops  20  MOES/CDU  50000 
Develop policy guidelines to implement NCF                        
Develop Compulsory syllabi based on the NCF  6 mths   6 mths     30000 syll.           144000 
Prepare teachers guide for new primary syllabi     3 mths     30000           39000 
Pilot new curriculum for grades 1-8                 1000  CDU/TA   
Train teachers to use the new curriculum        6 weeks     13 wkshops  19,000  MOES/TA  2500000 
National implementation for new Comp. curriculum                  CDU/TA   
Develop secondary syllabi based on the NCF     6mths     10000 syll           28000 
Prepare teachers guide for new Sec. curriculum     3mths     10000           19000 
Pilot new curriculum for grades 9-11                       
Train teachers to use the new Sec. curriculum        6 weeks     13 wkshops  1000  CDU/TA   
National implementation of new Sec. curriculum.               10,000  MOES/TA  1375000 
                     CDU/TA   
  4.5 
E2.2 Teacher Development    6 mths   24  mths  weeks      19 workshop   40220     1,683,000 
Develop system for teacher data on EMIS  6 mths  12 mths               132000 
Strengthen Teacher Development Agency        1 week     1 wkshops                 20    TDA, MOES  5000 
Review & enhance teacher training curriculum                     LG and   
Review teacher employment conditions     12 mths               Regional  36000 
Review teacher in-service and PD training                         
Develop teacher accreditation and QA        1 week     5 wkshops               200      10000 
Train teachers in new teaching methods        4 weeks     13 wkshops   20,000      1500000 
                         
E2.3  Text Book Development   6.5mths   18 mths   1.5      6 wkshops   170     4,597,600 
Develop process to map new content in texbooks  6 mths  18mths  .5 weeks     1 wkshops  20 people  CDU  152000 
Link textbook demand with EMIS system                        
Pilot privatisation of textbook development                        
 Pilot cost recovery of small set of textbooks        2 weeks     5 wkshops   100 people   LG, MOES   10000 
Scale up privatisation and cost recovery                     CDU   
Training textbook writers  .5 mths     1.5 weeks      2 wkshps   50 people     15600 
Primary 3-
compul -12    
Textbooks for grades 1-9 supplied           subjects  4,068,000copies @ $1.00 each     4,068,000 
 1,322,000 copies  @ $1.00 each 
Textbooks for grades 10-12  30 % subsidy           11 subjects  (take 30% subsidy)     352,000 
                         
E2.4  Alternative Teaching Resources   1mth   1.5 mths   5 week      5 workshops   200     1,069,000 
Develop policy for school libraries  1mth  1 mth                 18000 
Develop policy for alternative textbook                        
Develop policies for computers in schools                        
Train Teachers/Directors to use alter. resources     1 mth  5 week     5 wkshops  200 people     13000 
Procure minimum alternative resources for Sch.                       
30% of school have alternative resources            1020 school   $1000 per school       1020000 
                         
C2.5 Examination and Monitoring    6mths   18 mths   2 weeks       2 wkshops   200     1,274,000 
Strengthen  NCAE capacity  6 mths  18 mths                 150000 
Develop clear roles and functions for NCAE                        
Develop indicators and benchmarks                         
Develop exams for grade 9 national exams*            print  exam   12 subjects x 63,500 students     762,000 
Pilot national monitoring processes                        
Develop exams for grade 12 national exams *           print exam   11 subjects X 32,500 students     357,500 
Develop exams for secondary grades                        
Develop half year monitoring report                        
Train local experts         2 week     2 wkshops  200 people     5000 
                         
 
 
 
 E 3. Financing Pre-University  Education- Resource Input Matrix  
# of 
Foreign  Local  Training  Resources &  Number of  People  Department  Costs 
Activity  T/A  Experts  Programs  Equipment  workshops  Involved  Responsible  Estimates 
E3.1 Review composition of pre university budget  6 mths  18 mths  2 weeks     5 workshops  260 people     176000 
Develop transparent Financial model  6 mths  18 mths              MOES, MOF  150000 
Separate each stakeholder contribution         2 weeks     5 workshops  260 people  LG  26000 
Separate block grants into sectorial funding                         
Separate conditional and unconditional funds                         
Review percentage distribution in the sector                         
                          
E3.2 Instruments to Transfer  Budget Funds  4 mths  18 mths  6 wks     13workshops  260 people     150500 
Disaggregate block grants into line items  4 mths  18 mths              MOES, MOF  118000 
Develop per-capita funding models                    LG     
Develop accountability of LG funds                          
Develop mechanism for decentralising funding                          
Develop monitoring& accounting of funding                          
Comprehensive training at all levels        6 wks     13workshops  260 people     32500 
                          
E3.3 Increasing Efficiency in the sub sector   2 mths  6 mths  1 wks     5 workshops  180 people     63500 
Develop system for sharing finance information  2 mths                    32000 
Attract private sector funds                         
Develop legislations for schools to collect funds                         
Negotiate tax exemption for education investments     6 mths                 18000 
Develop process to engage public in education funding        1.5 wks     5 workshops  180 people  LG, Private   13500 
                     schools    
E3.4  Review Investment programs  4 mths  27 mths  4.6 wks     12 workshop  217     185 624 660 
Prioritise  and plan refurbishment and new constr.  3 mths   24 mths                 120000 
Develop maintenance funding model        1 wks     2 workshop  65  LG & MOES  8200 
Develop legislation to encourage direct investment  1 mths  3 mths  2 wks     6 workshops  100  LG and private  33500 
Schools  to plan investment projects                    companies    
Training in planning refurbishments        1.6 wks     4 workshops  52     5200 
 Refurbishment pending  40 % of schools (1360)          40% of school            185457760 
                          
E3.5 Mentoring and Supporting   1 mths  12 mths  4 wks     5 workshop  150     84500 
Train mentors to work at MOES levels   1 mths  12 mths  1 wk     2 workshop  40  MOES  57000 
Train mentors to work at Regional/LG levels        2 wk     2 workshop  70  REG & LG  17500 
Train mentors to work at school levels        1 wk     1 workshop  40  Schools  10000 
                   
                          
 
 
 
  
 
E 4. Capacity Building and Human Resource Development - Resource input matrix 
Foreign  Local  Training  Resoures &  Number of  # of People  Department  Costs 
Activity  T/A  Experts  Programs  Equipment  workshops  Involved  Responsible  Estimates 
E4.1 Cross Sector Service   1mth  9 mths  2 weeks  secretariat  6 wkshops  15 people  MOES  44250 
Establish cross sector advisory team  1mth  3 mths  2 weeks  secretariat  6 wkshops  15 people  MOES  26250 
Public awareness and ownership      6 mth                 18000 
                         
E4.2  Rationalising Schools  2mth  18 mths  6 weeks     26 wkshops  13 people  MOES & LG  99000 
Establish process for school rationalisation  1mth  6 mths     office space           34000 
Develop national focus for eduaction reform  1mth  12 mths     equipments           52000 
Develop process to ensure equity and access           Media broadcast            
Adoption of school rationalisation                 26 people     1300 
Stakeholder workshops        6 weeks     26 wkshops     MOES & LG   
                         
E4.3  Inspection vs Facilitation  1mth  3 mths  4 weeks     13wkshops  120 people     34230 
Develop new roles as facilitators  1mth  3 mths                 25000 
Develop professionalism and trust                        
Train school inspectors in new roles        4 weeks     13 wkshops  120 people  MOES, LG,  9230 
                     Sch Directors   
E4.4  Professionalisation of Teachers  2 mths  12 mths  4 weeks     10 wkshops  170 people      85000 
Redesign Teaching as fulltime profession  2 mths  12 mths  1.6 weeks     4 wkshops   20 people    MOES, MOF  70000 
Review teacher condition to match civil servants         1.6 weeks     4 wkshops   20 people    LG, Teachers  2000 
Diversify teacher competencies                 30 people       3000 
Establish and support teacher prof associations        0.8 weeks     2 wkshops  100 people   Teachers  10000 
                        
E4.5 Curriculum elective and specialisations  1 mth  6 mths  8 weeks     15 wkshops  230 people     66500 
Develop curriculum to reflect every needs  1 mth  6 mths  2 weeks  Internet access  2 wkshops  15 people     41500 
Consolidate subjects to increase learning time            new models    15 people      
Train CD experts to undertake the above task        6 weeks     13 wkshops  200 people  CD, Inspector  25000 
                    Teac & Direc   
E4.6  Research Data Driven Policy Development  6 mths  12 mths  4 weeks    13wkshops  50 people    139500 
 Develop process for data driven policy making  6 mths  12 mths     computers           132000 
Develop capacity to use data to test new ideas           stat software            
Train staff in data analysis and reporting         6 weeks     10wkshops  50 people  MOES Central  7500 
                  & Regional   
                 
 
 