MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND EDUCATION OF 
THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA 
 
 
 
 
S T A T E   P R O G R A M   F O R  
E D U C A T I O N A L   D E V E L O P M E N T  
( F O R   T H E   P E R I O D   O F   2 0 0 1 - 2 0 0 5 )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
YEREVAN  2000 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
The State program for educational development (2001-2005.) is elaborated according to 
the points 4 and 5 of Article 4 of the Law on “Education” of RoA 
 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  2 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Part 1. Situation Overview and Problems in the Field of Education   …………4 
 
      I. Brief Overview of the Education System…………………………………..……….4 
 
     II. Problems in the Field of Education………………………………………………….11 
 
 
Part 2. Program Objectives and Implementation Timelines ………...……..…………..20 
 
 
Part 3. Program Activities………………………………………………..…………………22 
 
 
Part 4. State and Social Guarantees for the Students ………………….…………….…31 
 
 
Part  5. Program Funding…………………………………………………………..……….32 
 
 
Part  6. Program Activities and Implementation Timelines ………..…………………….33 
 
 
Attachments…………………………………………………………………………………48 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  3 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
 
PART 1 
SITUATION OVERVIEW AND PROBLEMS IN THE FIELD OF EDUCATION 
 
I. BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE EDUCATION SYSTEM  
 
Education in Armenia has centuries-old history and traditions. From the very beginning 
of its formation the Armenian schooling used to be the stronghold for the nation’s 
political and national survival and the guarantee for its development.   
The current system of education was established during the short existence of the first 
Republic of Armenia (1918-1920) and then developed within the Soviet period (1920-
1990). 
Education in Armenia always has enjoyed high popularity. The maintenance and 
development of the educational system and up-keeping of its competitiveness in the 
international arena nowadays too, is considered as a state and national priority,  
The educational system in Armenia includes: 
( :1)  The set of educational programs providing for the state education criteria, on-going 
education at different levels and scopes  
( :1)  The list of educational institutions of different types implementing those programs  
( :1)  System of educational management bodies, their subordinate organizations and 
entities. 
 
1. Structure of the educational system, net of the educational 
institutions and composition of enrolled students  
 
The educational system of Armenia includes all the levels of education starting from pre-
school education up to the post graduate level (attachment 1) and operates mainly 
thanks to the budgetary funding. There are also non-State educational institutions in the 
Republic, and the regulation of their performance gradually involves them in the unified 
educational system.  
 
Pre-school education is carried out in three types of educational institutions: creche 
(day nursery) (for 2-3 years old children), kindergarten   (for 3-7 years old children), 
creche (day nursery) - kindergarten (joint): 
In the field of pre-school education currently there are operating 825 community and 19 
departmental institutions where respectively 51905 and 996 children are enrolled.  
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  4 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
The number of pre-school institutions has decreased for 21% (1069 institutions) 
compared to the 1991 level.   The number of enrolled children has significantly 
decreased, too. In 1991, 143900 children (39% of that certain age group) attended pre-
school institutions, whereas in 2000, their number dropped to 53200 children (21% of 
that certain age group), enrollment dropped for 18%. 
There are also operating 21 non-state kindergartens. 
 
Secondary (full) general education    is carried out by a three-level secondary 
education school with duration of 10 years schooling in the following continuous levels 
Elementary school (grades 1-3), 
Middle school (grades 4-8), 
High school (grades 9-10) 
The first two levels of the secondary school constitute the main schooling.  
There are 1388 secondary schools in Armenia of which 10 – are elementary schools, 
150 - main (eight-year) and 1228- full secondary schools. 115 of the high schools have 
the status of specialized colleges. The number of secondary educational institutions 
compared to the level of 1991 (1326 school) has increased for 4,7 %.  
 560000 pupils are enrolled in the state secondary schools. The number of the pupils 
compared to the level of 1991 (583797 pupils) has decreased for 4,2%.    
Besides the state secondary schools, there are also 34 non-state licensed schools in the 
Republic, of which 26 are operational. The number of enrolled pupils in the non-state 
schools totals to 2719. 
 
Special general education is carried out in boarding schools with secondary school 
and special curriculum  
Currently there are 51 state boarding institutions, of which 38 are designed for those 
needing special education, 5- for children deprived of parents and from socially 
vulnerable families and 8- for assisting to the education of talented children. There are 
11244 children enrolled in boarding schools of which 52%-Á stays in the institutions for 
the nights. 
The number of boarding institutions has increased for 8,5% (47 schools) compared to 
the level of 1991 and the number of children enrolled – for 32,3% (8500 pupils).  
The number of pupils enrolled in the boarding schools grows annually because of the 
children from the socially vulnerable. There are not non-state boarding institutions.  
 
Out-of school educational  system involves athletics, esthetic, children’s, youths, 
technical training schools, and centers.  
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  5 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
There are 161 out-of school state and community institutions where 55300 children are 
enrolled.  
The number of out-of-school institutions has decreased for 28,1% (224 institutions) 
compared to the level of 1991 and the number of enrolled children for 64,4% (155000 
pupils). 
 
Specialized Preliminary education is provided in specialized technical schools (STS) 
based on the main and full secondary education. Duration of the training courses is 
respectively 3 and 1 years.  
Currently there are 56 STSs with 2100 enrolled students. The number of STSs 
compared to the level of 1991 has decreased for 40% (93 STSs) and the number of the 
enrolled students- for 93,6%   (33000 students). There are not non-state STSs.  
 
Mid-level professional education is provided in mid-level professional educational 
institutions (MLPEI), in colleges and vocational schools.  
MLPEI is provided based on the main and full (complete) secondary school education in 
daytime as well as distance learning courses. Duration of the education depending from 
the basic secondary school education of the students and the chosen profession varies 
from 1 year 10 months to 4 year 10 months. Professionals are being trained in 127 fields 
of studies and the graduates get the qualification of junior professionals. Currently there 
are 77 operational state MLPEIs (with 10 subsidiaries), where 28048 students are 
enrolled and 62 non-state MLPEIs. 
The number of MLPEIS compared to the level of 1991 has increased for 13,2% (68 
MLPEIs), and the number of the enrolled students has decreased for 31% and the 
number of enrolled students for 40600.  
 
Higher and post-graduate professional education is provided through a three-level 
degree programs: bachelor’s, graduate diploma professional’s and magistrate’s in State 
and non-state educational institutions through day time and distance learning courses, 
on paid and unpaid principles. In post-graduate education there are post graduate 
studentship, (aspirantura) and doctorate (Ph. D.). Currently there are 16 state and 73 
non-state higher educational institutions. The number of state higher educational 
institutions has increased for (14), 14,2% compared to the level of 1991.   
         Currently 36663 students are enrolled in the state higher educational institutions, 
and 19755 students – in non-state higher educational institutions. The number of 
students enrolled in the state higher educational institutions has decreased for (48918 
students) 25% compared to the level of 1991.  The 40% of the students enrolled in state 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  6 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
higher educational institution studies for free. Currently in the Republic there are 9 are 
post graduate studentships, (aspirantura) and doctorates  (Ph. D.), operating within 9 
higher educational institutions and in three of the higher educational institutions there are 
MA degree programs, where 660 students study for magistrates degree, 882 – for 
aspirants degree and 8 – for doctorates degree study for free as well as 694 MA degree 
and 159 post graduate studentships (aspirants) are provided for education fees  
(attachment 2).  
 
2. Personnel employed in the field of education 
 
In pre-school institutions a pedagogical staff of 6934 is employed among them 4866 
tutors and 844 Directors.  92,6%- of them has professional education, of which 34,2% - 
higher pedagogical.  
 
In secondary schools 59600 pedagogues are employed.  Though the number of 
teachers exceeds the normative requirements (since 42000 teachers are required, still 
there is a need of pedagogical cadres (particularly in rural areas) as they are located 
disproportionally and some are under-staffed.    
Currently in the Republic the teacher-pupil ratio is 1/10  (attachment 3), and the ratio of 
administrative employee-pupil is 1/20, which is below the level of not only economically 
developed countries but below the world’s level as well (in countries of European 
cooperation these ratios respectively total to  1/17 and 1/25). 
75,2%- (44800) of the pedagogical staff has higher education, 2,3%-Á (1400)- has 
incomplete higher education, and 19,8% -(11.800) has mid-level professional education 
and 2,7% - (1600)- has secondary school education. 20%- of the teachers has not got 
pedagogical education (attachment 4): 
50900- of the pedagogues are women and 8700- are men. 
 664 teachers are employed in non-state secondary schools. 
 
In mid-level professional educational institutions almost 5180 pedagogues are 
employed of which 70%- are women. 
 
In higher educational institutions 4507 people are involved in professor-lecturers 
capacity, of which 415- are professors, 2137-are docents. 28.3%- of the scientific-
pedagogical staff are women. The lecturer – student ratio is 1/6. The professor-lecturers 
personnel have decreased for 19,6% (5603 people) compared to the level of 1991. 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  7 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
The professor-lecturers personnel of non-state higher educational institutions total to 
3651. 
The age of pedagogical and scientific-pedagogical group tends to steadily grow up, and 
respectively is 55 and 60.  
 
3. Funding of the education system 
 
The field of education in Armenia is mainly funded from the budget. The funding of 
education for 2000 constitutes about the 11 % (27.279.447,4 thousand drams) of the 
budget (252,780.438,8 thousand drams), or otherwise, only the 2 % of the GDP. 
For comparison we should mention that in 1991 it constituted the 7,2% of the GDP. The 
education funding in the structure of the budget is provided in levels (attachment 5) and 
operational classification (attachment 6): The funding allocation within the system is very 
disproportional. Starting from 1996 the state pre-school institutions were shifted over to 
local self governing bodies as a property and currently they are funded from the 
community budgets. Starting from September 01, of 2000, 204 schools in the Republic 
are being funded according to the per pupil principle. The wages of the teachers has 
decreased 14 times compared to the level of 1991.  The rate of wages for pedagogical 
staff of the Republic totals to 12.752 drams which is insignificantly more than the 
average salary (12.615 drams) level of the state funded enterprises. 
If the secondary education is mainly funded from the state budget than the state funding 
provided for the higher and post graduate professional education constitutes the 12%-of 
the education funding and 30% of the general expenses of the educational institutions, 
the remaining 70% constitute the out-of budgetary funds. The share of the mid-level 
professional education in the state budget totals to 4%. The non-state educational 
institutions do not receive state allocations. 
 
4. Main directions of the reforms implemented in the field of 
education 
 
In 1995 the Constitution of Republic of Armenia was adopted the Article 35 of which 
states that 
( :1)  every citizen of RoA has the right to education,  
( :1)  in state educational institutions the secondary education is free 
( :1)  every citizen has the right to receiving free higher and other professional education in 
state educational institutions on competitive basis 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  8 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
In the Law on "Education" adopted by the National Assembly of RoA on April 14 of 1999 
included the Constitutional statements and the implementation of the Law was definitely 
channeled towards the development of the reforming system. 
 
In the field of secondary schooling a comprehensive reform is being implemented. To 
that end the approval of exemplary charter of the state secondary school by the 
Government of RoA still back in 1996 was of significant importance, since until that time 
the schools were performing with temporarily, partially suspended charter. 
In the field of secondary education the credit program for "Education management and 
financial reforms" is being implemented since 1997 and is on-going in the following 
areas: 
( :1)  Further decentralization of state secondary schools system management  
( :1)  Improvement of normative-legislative basis for school management and autonomy.  
( :1)  Introduction of new funding principles for the secondary schools, increased efficiency 
of budget funds utilization. 
( :1)  Democratization of in-school management and transition to school council 
governance  
( :1)  Qualification improvement of pedagogical and administrative staff  
( :1)  Provision of secondary schools with basic textbooks, etc. 
 
 The Governmental decrees No 661 issued in 1998, (on Further decentralization of state 
secondary schooling system), No 377 of 1999 (on Approval of the pilot program for 
secondary schooling system of RoA) of RoA of and No 634 of 2000 (0n further 
development of secondary school reform pilot program) were aimed at guiding the 
reforms of the sector. The schools involved in the pilot program of the reforms have 
shifted over to per- pupil finding principle, top management structures- school councils- 
have been formed there. Principles, members of the council have been trained and the 
training of accountants is on its way. Within the 1997-2000 period 85 textbooks and 34 
teachers' manuals have been published and distributed to schools. In 1997 the 
textbooks rental system has been developed and introduced, the objective of which was 
provision of pupils with basic textbooks approved by the Ministry of Education and 
Science of RoA at a rental basis. At the same time the "Textbook Revolving Fund" non-
governmental organization was established which provides for the collection and control 
of the textbook revolving fund. 
 
In the last couple of years the publication of several magazines ("Bnaget/Naturalist", 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  9 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
"Mathematics in School", "Russian Language in Armenia" etc) addressed to pedagogues 
and pupils has resumed. 
Secondary school management information system is being introduced towards 
establishment of unified information systems network. To that end the respective 
departments of the Ministry of Education and Science, education departments of marzes 
and Center for educational reforms have been equipped with computers. 
By the No 226 decree of Government of RoA issued on May 08, 2000 the state criteria 
for secondary (full/complete) education has been improved, the implementation of which 
will provide for quality control of secondary schooling and attaining its adequate level. 
Mid-level professssional education reforms resulted in: 
( :1)  approval of the list of professions for the mid-level professional educational 
institutions 
( :1)  introduction of new entrance regulations for paid education 
( :1)  approval of state criteria for mid-level professional education by the Government of 
RoA 
( :1)  approval of exemplary charter for state mid-level professional educational institution 
by the Government of RoA 
Higher and post graduate professional education reforms include education 
structure, contents and management. 
( :1)  In three higher educational institutions of the Republic a three degree-level education 
system has been introduced: BA, MA and Ph.D. 
( :1)  Humanitarization of education is being introduced in several directions: university-
fication of education, creation of new fields of studies (theology, fine arts, social 
works, political science, et.), expansion of basic humanitar sciences ("Law", 
"Economy") and introduction of other humanitar obligatory and selective courses and 
humanization of education. 
( :1)  Expansion of autonomy of higher educational institutions in the fields of management 
and funding. 
( :1)  Development of the principles for state-order admission/entrance requirements 
( :1)  Approval of the education criteria for higher professional education by the 
Government of RoA 
( :1)  Regulation of the performances of non-state higher educational institutions by 
implementation of the licensing and accreditation order of the Government of RoA 
which promotes competitiveness in the field of higher education 
There are more than 50 local and international organizations that implement various 
programs in the field of education. 
 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  10 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
II. PROBLEMS OF EDUCATION 
 
Various problems have emerged in the field of education due to the social-economic 
though situation of the country. The continuous decline of population standards of living 
and soaring poverty have been directly reflected in the field of education and the 
mentioned factors jointly have had a negative impact on the quality of education 
resulting in the decline of the overall educational level of population Significant number 
of the problems and difficulties existing at all the educational levels are characteristic for 
the system, however a certain part of them are typical for that certain levels. The 
problems characteristic for the system are the following: 
 
1. Disproportional funding and under-funding of the educational system 
 
Insufficient funding is one of the main reasons causing the crises in the field of 
education. Following its independence, the economy of Armenia suffered a sharp 
decline. The GDP level in 1993 decreased for 60 % compared to the 1989 level. 
However, due to the implementation of reforms by the Government towards 
establishment of market economy the economic decline in the recent years has been 
suspended and moreover, even some increase has been registered, however the low 
level of GDP is still maintained. Therefore, the State Budget and adequately the share of 
the state funding allocation to the field of education is very little. The field gets funding 
which is considerably less than the real needs are. Thus, in the last years the funding for 
education totals to 2-2.5% of the GDP, this is almost half of the international criteria. 
Besides the shortage of budgetary allocations, the share of education within the 
structure of the state budget is small enough, too, though it has a tendency to grow in 
the last years. The state funding for education constitutes the 11 % of the total budget 
which is significantly less than the international standards are. 
The tough financial situation of the field gets even more difficult because some part of 
the funds to be allocated to education and projected in the Law of RoA on "the Budget 
are not being provided, resulting in year to year debt accruals and the payments are 
made with regular delays. Given the lack of resources their effective utilization becomes 
a priority. The existing budgetary and non-budgetary resources are being allocated and 
utilized in a non-efficient manner, uncoordinated and not in line with international 
standards in terms of the levels of education (pre-school, main school, secondary 
school, mid and higher professional education) as well as budget line items within the 
framework of certain educational institutions. The parents' contributions too, are not 
coordinated and in some cases also have shadow character. The current structure for 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  11 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
state funding of the education still bears the influence of Soviet norms though undergoes 
changes in line with the development of market relations. The budget analysis reveals 
the prioritization of secondary education by the State. In the structure of education 
funding the share of secondary education in 2000 has increased for 72% compared to 
the level of 1996 which totaled to 41 %, exceeding the average European standards - 
(70%): However, it should be mentioned that the budgetary allocations provided for the 
secondary education increase not because of the general increase of the share of 
education in the state budget, but because of the ongoing cut-offs in the other levels of 
education. Thus the state funding for preschool education has gradually decreased 
starting from 1991, and has been completely suspended since 1997. 
 
2. The imperfect legislation, lack of by-laws and incomplete 
implementation of laws 
 
When adopting the Law of RoA on “Education” there were already a number of some 
principle laws, by-laws and the Civil Code of RoA providing for the implementation of 
state governance, local-self governing, social-economic, financial and  tax policies. 
Therefore, certain Articles of the Law actually have been adjusted to the already existing 
legislation thus turning the Law of RoA “on  Education” into an incomplete law.  
The inadequate implementation of laws and by-laws, imperfect implementation 
mechanisms or their non-existence, delayed adoption of certain laws, as well as 
contradictions of the legislation hinder the complete implementation of the education 
policy.  
Actually, the legislation of RoA currently does not provide for the progressive 
development of the education as stated and guaranteed in the Law of RoA “on 
Education” as the most important factor for strengthening the statehood (Article 4, point 
1). 
The enforcement quality of laws and legislative acts as well as the lack of functional 
control mechanisms for protection of the rights of subjects involved in educational 
processes cause specific problems.  
Thus, the expansion, clarification and proper implementation of the legislation turns into 
an acute problem demanding an urgent solution.  
 
3. The imperfect governance, unclear delineation and coordination of  
functions, insufficient horizontal links among the different levels of 
governance  
 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  12 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
The lack of operative connections between the state, regional and local self  governing 
bodies is the result of the imperfect legislation in the field of education. The educational 
institutions are  under the supervision of different agencies, and there are not by-laws 
with clearly delineated functions. The lack of legislative acts for governance coordination 
causes serious difficulties for the education governing authorized entity in carrying out 
responsibilities. The unsolicited adoption of normative acts by the executive entities 
causes contradictions in the system of governance.  
In almost all the levels of the education governance there is a lack of required skills. The 
self-governing mechanisms of the educational institutions are poorly developed, too. The 
lack of competitiveness among the educational institutions as well as the poor contesting 
conditions of certain institutions hinder achieving  autonomy  for provision of  real 
development of the institutions. The real  basis for autonomy is  not established yet, 
because of the lack of control system, too. 
The involvement of the society in the education management  and democratization of 
the education system are developing at a slow pace.  
The control mechanisms and reporting systems required as  pre-condition and tools for 
efficient management of education is not developed yet. The problems of reliable data 
collection, assessment and - based on them- efficient decision making come forward.  
 
4. Slow pace of integration into the international educational system 
and uncompetitiveness.   
 
Following the collapse of the Soviet system the education structure of Armenia has not 
yet gained new quality in terms of its structure, contents and management and cannot 
be compared with the education systems of the developed countries.  
The international integration of the education system of Armenia is hindered by: 
( :1)  The lack of state unified education criteria for all the levels of education; 
( :1)  The lack of unified system of education levels and gradations in terms of structure 
and duration of the education; 
( :1)  The slow pace of introduction of new educational and information technologies in the 
field of education, those involved in the educational processes do not possess 
sufficient knowledge on the information technologies, which is one of the first pre-
conditions for international integration and the demand of the 21st century threshold.  
The intensification of the international integration of education is important from the 
national point of view as well. Provision of quality education meeting the international 
requirements will harmonize  the knowledge of Armenians dispersed all over the wold 
with various cultural backgrounds and  their personal qualities. Therefore, it is required 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  13 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
to promote integration in two aspects: international and national, meanwhile, by turning 
the first one into a beneficial point for the second one.  
 
5. Decline in the access for education and enrollment 
 
One of the acute issues of the field of education is the unequal condition for getting 
education for the different social groups, which creates discrepancy in the right of every 
citizen entitled to get education as stipulated by the Constitution of RoA and the 
possibilities for its realization.   
The following several main factors cause the inaccessibility of education:   
(:1)  Low standards of living of the majority of population and insolvency,  
( :1)  Decreased state order for middle and higher professional education, 
( :1)  Lack of required means and adequate conditions for involvement of children with a 
need for special education in the educational processes, 
( :1)  Demographic changes caused by the population movement and difficulties related to 
involvement of temporarily leaving the Republic and then returning children in the 
educational processes given the problems of language barriers and physiological 
adjustments.  
The listed factors result in the enrollment decline in almost all levels of education.  
 
6. Understaffing and  decline of professional level 
 
The implementing partner of the state program for educational development should be 
the teacher. Whereas currently the field of education faces the problem of staffing with 
several variations: 
a)  Steady tendency for employing elderly pedagogical staff. The average age group of 
the pedagogues in the secondary schooling is about 55, 1 of every 6 teacher is a 
pensioner. The average age group of the professors-lecturers involved in the field of 
higher education is 56-58, and in certain specialties it comes to over 60.  
b)  Gender inequality – the problem has several variations, in the secondary school the 
feminization is obvious (82 % of the teachers are women), which does not provide for 
development of a full-fledged citizen, and in the field of higher education, on the 
contrary, male specialists prevail (71.7%). 
c)  Outflow of qualified cadres and their replacement with non-professionals. Because of 
the salary levels and low rating of the profession and poor social protection there is 
an on-going steady outflow of qualified specialists from the sector, for which the 
quality of the pedagogical and scientific-pedagogical staff suffered and caused the 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  14 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
“brain drain”. In the field of secondary education 12000 of 59600 teachers do not 
have professional education. In this aspect the situation is even worse in rural 
schools, which does not guaranty the citizen residing in rural areas enjoyment of 
his/her right to qualified education.   The teachers’ personnel of the Republic are 
allocated disproportionally.  If in the urban areas there is an accumulation of 
pedagogical staff, than in rural schools there are vacancies for 1600 teachers, when 
the number of actual teachers there exceeds the stated norms for 30%. 
d)  Incomplete provision of qualification improvement, training and attestation 
processes. If the qualification improvement and training activities have had a formal 
character within the last decade (few pedagogues have been involved in them) than 
the attestation has never been applied. Though some certain efforts have been 
made during the recent two years aimed at it, however, the problem needs a 
complex solution.  The training of Diaspora teachers comes forward as a separate 
issue in this sphere. The mapping of Diaspora educational institutions is almost 
accomplished, their specific needs are being identified and coordinated. The priority 
among them is the provision with Armenian -subjects teachers, towards which should 
be directed the efforts of teachers’ qualification improvement and growth of a 
generation implementing the updated and clarified national ideology of pedagogues 
for Diaspora.  To that end the attainment of Armenian pedagogical ideology is also 
urgent.   
e)  Imperfect preparation system – Quality decline in specialists’ preparation is the 
consequence of an imperfect system. It includes not modern curriculum and 
educational plans, unsatisfactory professional levels of professors, a gap between 
the theory and practice, new teaching methods are not being introduced, the 
requirements imposed on the system of education are being ignored, there is no 
conformity in the labor and education markets. In the field of secondary schooling the 
low quality of teachers is of particular concern. The existing system of pedagogical 
education does not provide for the full development of a teacher, professional skills 
and personal qualities.  In the field of higher and post-graduate education the 
reduction of state order in MA and Aspirantura (PH. D) degree programs (for 2-2.5 
times) and negligence of basic, innovative and prospective scientific directions and 
social sciences in the structure of state order do not provide for the education-
science connection and limitation of the preparation of professionals with higher 
education in the local scientific schools do not provide adequate level of scientific 
pedagogical personnel. Whereas as stated in the Law of RoA “on Education” the 
progressive development of education can be achieved only by bringing together the 
educational and scientific activities with a focus on fast transfer of innovative 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  15 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
knowledge.  Connected to the strengthening of democracy processes in the Republic 
and humanitarization of education the issue of preparation and re-training of 
specialists in anthropological sciences (international relations, social work, political 
sciences, economy, law, etc,) becomes an acute one.  
f)  The change in the role of a pedagogue and its functions is a problem of prospective 
development of education.  The phenomena typical to transition period (poverty, 
unemployment, violence, etc) are reflected in the field of education-by making 
necessary the expansion of pedagogues professional preparation, today s/he also 
needs the background in physiology, sociology, conflict resolution, etc. The quick 
growth and update of the vast knowledge typical for the informed society formed by 
the end of the century force to focus on teaching of basic sciences, which can 
regularly be updated and adjusted and for the pedagogues- on turning from the main 
source of knowledge into a architect-methodologist summarizing and coordinating 
the knowledge of the students.  The solution of the mentioned problems requires 
complex adjustments in the fields of preparation of pedagogues and scientific-
pedagogues, qualification improvement and training.  
 
7. Division in the educational and training (upbringing) processes 
 
The education system of independent Armenia had to free itself from the imposed 
ideological chain by channeling the education contents, out-of-class and out-of-school 
activities towards achievement of a new objective –formation of a citizen bearing the 
national and international values.  
However, because of the lack of national ideological propaganda the development of 
new concept for upbringing a citizen in compliance with the new political and social 
economic situations is still pending. In the grades of values the place of education is left 
vacant. The rating of upbringing has suffered. The subjects forming an individual are not 
fixed in the curricula, the low level of methodological, psychological-pedagogical 
background of the teachers significantly weakened the upbringing function of the 
lessons, the school-parent-society relation is broken, and sects have penetrated into 
schools.  
The severe insufficiency of funding or its absolute lack for out-of-class and out-of-school 
activities that are the continuation of educational processes, dissolution of a number of 
entities providing additional education, changing their profiles and providing mainly paid 
services have resulted in sharp decline of this type of education accessibility and 
reduction of the services provided.  As a consequence the completeness of the 
upbringing system, the unification of education and upbringing is destroyed, the students 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  16 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
are deprived of the right of being involved in something within their interests, the number 
of street children and children braking the laws have increased.  
Thus, in the new political and socioeconomic situation the re-establishment and 
development of educational institutions and as a whole, the upbringing function of the 
education system and integration of general and additional education becomes an acute 
problem demanding urgent solution.  
  
8. Insufficient material-technical and training-methodological basis  
 
In the past ten years the building maintenance of the education system has been 
destroyed. Particularly the secondary schooling has suffered.  Following the earthquake 
and warring activities some 322 schools have suffered by being completely destroyed or 
braked down.  In the last years many of them have been rehabilitated through the funds 
of state budget and international organizations. However, in the disaster zone there still 
are a number of schools operating in domiks, and construction of typical buildings for 
them is very urgent, and still many educational institutions all over the Republic do not 
have satisfactory buildings.  Almost 350 schools (mainly in rural areas) needs capital or 
partial renovation (particularly – roofing and bathrooms).  
For several years the issue of regular heating of the educational institutions is not being 
solved. If some of the institutions have somehow addressed the issue, than in schools 
the classrooms are still heated by stoves, oil-heaters and electric devices. Buildings of 
mid-level professional institutions and some buildings of higher educational institutions 
are not heated at all, which causes their destruction and breaks the rhythm of the 
educational processes.  
Because of lack of funding the healthcare and sanitary hygienic requirements of the 
educational processes are not being met, as well as the norms of individual protection 
and safety.  
 At all the educational levels the institutions have not been provided with furniture, 
laboratory equipment, training-didactic materials, and test materials. The modern 
technical devices, equipment for practical work, information and computer equipment 
and communication means for education is strictly limited.  
The training-methodological activities, the variety of publications of professional literature 
and their volume have decreased, and as to the imported professional literature and 
publications, mainly they are assessable to the vulnerable groups involved in the field of 
education.  
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  17 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
If the problem of providing the secondary schools with educational literature is mainly 
resolved, than the efforts in formation of literature in the field of professional education, 
their translation and localization is still unsatisfactory.  
The library funds of the institutions are outdated and worn out, do not meet the 
requirements of modern libraries in terms of space, refurbishment and technical services 
provided (electronic libraries). 
 
9. Inefficient utilization of the system  
 
The tough situation of the educational institutions is reasoned not only by the lack of 
financial resources but also by their inefficient utilization.   
Even if the economy development and state revenue collection proceed in the predicted 
way, still the improved budgetary resources will not be enough for covering the minimal 
needs of education, if radical rationalization is not carried out in the field. The following 
main factors characterizing the current situation of the system state that fact: 
( :1)  Student-pedagogue relationship 
( :1)  Significant numbers of support and administrative staff 
( :1)  Under-filled grades and groups 
( :1)  Under-staffed pedagogical personnel 
( :1)  Disproportional allocation of educational institutions all over the Republic, and 
particularly the number of closely located schools in densely populated areas  
( :1)  Significant number of under-loaded institutions 
( :1)  Strict centralization (particularly in the capital of Armenia) of narrowly specialized 
(special, boarding) schools and institutions providing various educational programs 
(mid and higher professional institutions)  
 
There are additional problems in the field of mid and higher professional education: 
 
( :1)  Duplication of the offered degree programs not in compliance with the institution’s 
profile, 
( :1)  Disproportional allocation of the institutions and offered courses by their location, not 
in compliance with social-economic peculiarities and development perspectives of 
the certain  areas 
 
Therefore, there is need for rationalization not only in the entire field of education (re-
allocation of institutions and fields of studies), but within each institution as well (pupil-
teacher ratio, growth of a training group, etc.) 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  18 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
10. Mismatch of the education structure and contents to the requirements of 
market relations  
 
The education structure now undergoes a stage of re-arrangement and re-formation. 
There are structural problems not only in the field of secondary schooling but also in the 
field of professional education.  
The necessity of overloaded curricula, age group peculiarities of the enrolled students 
and employment problems dictate the need of shifting over from the 10-year  
to 11 year secondary schooling. The basic general education does not provide for the 
further education of the graduates and their social adjustment.  Therefore the need for 
changes in the secondary school criteria, curricula of fields of studies, textbooks and re-
distribution of training materials according to the 11-year schooling requirements 
becomes a necessity.   
The policy implemented in the filed of pre-professional education needs clarification, 
particularly in demand, list of professions and funding.  
In the field of higher education one (5 year) and two-grade (4 +2) systems are 
operational which makes the labor market survey necessary in terms of preparation of 
specialists with BA, MA and PH D degrees.  
The development of unified gradation system of professional education qualifications 
(starting from pre-professional and including the post graduate levels) is a global issue.  
The level of involvement of enterprises in education provision and development is at an 
extremely low level.  
The slow pace of education contents update does not provide for spiritual, economic and 
social progress of a society heading to democratization, for formation of a citizen and 
establishment of open society and lawful statehood.  
Lack of courses on market relations (civil education, principles of economy, human rights, life 
skills, ecological education, etc,) or their suspended introduction into the education providing 
for the multi-sided development of an individual and practical qualities gained by education 
impair the liberalization and humanitarization of education.  
Each of the 10 presented problems has its contribution in the final product of education 
quality. The existing quality of education does not provide for:  
( :1)  Satisfactory social realization of an individual 
( :1)  Formation of a modern individual and citizen providing for the new level of the 
nation’s development,  
( :1)  Secondary and professional training of the labor force 
( :1)  Establishment of adequate basis for development of science  
 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  19 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
 
 
PART  2 
PROGRAM OBJECTIVES AND IMPLEMENTATION TIMELINES 
 
The main  strategic  direction of  the  program  is  the  progressive  development  of  an 
educational system contributing to the formation of a harmonically developed, socially 
active and creative individual with a patriotic, public and humane ideology- as a factor for 
statehood strengthening and socioeconomic progress of the society.  
 
Main objectives of the program are: 
 
( :1)  Provision of assessable and free general elementary, basic and full secondary 
education for the citizens of RoA in the state educational institutions, as well as free 
mid-level, higher and post graduate education on a competitive basis within the state 
educational criteria 
( :1)  Establishment of social economic conditions for provision of the Constitutional right 
of the citizens on Education 
( :1)  Harmonized development of an individual and his/her creative abilities, for formation 
of required motivation for education and self-education (for their entire lives) 
( :1)  Further development of normative legal, contextual social economic and 
organizational principles towards implementation of state policy in the field of 
education. 
( :1)  Provision of legal, social and economic guarantees of the field of education within the 
interests of an individual, society and state for the stable operational and balanced 
development  
( :1)  Maintenance and development of a unified educational area 
( :1)  Formation of a democratic, public-societal education management system 
( :1)  Improvement of interaction among  the state, local self governing and public 
organizations in the field of education development  
( :1)  Clear distinction of responsibilities in the field of education among the state, regional 
and local self governing bodies through respective legislation and normative legal 
acts  
( :1)  Efficient and high quality achievements of the educational institutions in the fields of 
educational scientific and scientific-technical researches 
( :1)  Promotion of international and national integration in the field of education and 
support in terms of meeting the individual’s educational requirements 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  20 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
( :1)  Focusing the development of education on strengthening the spiritual and mental 
potential of the Armenian people, maintenance and development of national and 
universal values 
The program is for the period of 2001-2005 and plans for the natural performance and 
steady development of the education system. The program is to be implemented in three 
phases: 
First phase- (2001 year) implementation of a set of measures for maintenance of the 
education system and establishment of conditions for its further development. In this 
phase the main program activities are: prevention of critical processes, undertaking 
emergency measures aimed at securing the natural performance of the educational 
institutions, improvement of normative legal and statistical basis in the field of education-
formation of the system for preparation of professionals.  
Second phase – (2002-2003 years) transfer to stable evaluation of the education 
system. 
Third phase – (2004-2005) transfer to progressive development of education to provide 
for its comprehensive promotion.  
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  21 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
 
PART 3 
OBJECTIVES AND ACTIVITIES  
 
1.  Improvement of the financial situation of the education system  
 
Objectives: 
 
1.  Increased funding from the state and local budgets for provision of the progressive 
development of education 
2.  Increased efficiency of budgetary funds utilization 
3.  Involvement of out-of-budgetary funds and their expansion 
4.  Implementation of favorable tax policy  
 
Activities 
 
1.  Introduction  of  new  funding  principles  (in  one  line  item  according  to  per  pupil 
principle) 
2.  Development of scenically justified state funding proportions according to the 
components of the education system (education levels, education programs with 
different fields of studies, certain educational institutions and education management 
bodies) 
3.  State funding projection for the guaranteed programs in the field of pre-school and 
out-of-school education and fixed funding from the local budgets 
4.  Regulation of parents’ payments and other out-of-budgetary funds in the field of pre-
school education  
5.  Regulation of payments collection in the field of secondary schooling for teaching 
preferred courses and provision of other paid educational services 
6.  Definition of funding allocation  and development of a financial formula for secondary 
schools for those children needing special conditions for education  
7.  Definition of payments for state paid educational services and regulation of utilization  
8.  Preparation of professionals for organizations in the mid and higher educational 
institutions on a contractual basis for financial reimbursement  
9.  Entitlement of tax privileges to the organizations supporting the field of education  
10. Provision of interest free long term loans to the students enrolled in paid education 
 
 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  22 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
 
2.  Improvement of the field of legislation1  
 
Objectives: 
 
1.  Amendments of the existing laws related to the field of education and adoption of 
new laws 
2.  Additions and amendments in the Law of RoA “on Education”  
3.  Development of sub-legislative acts and normative documents 
4.  Development and implementation of mechanism providing for the enforcement of 
legislation 
 
3.  Improvement of the management  
 
Objectives: 
 
1.  Revision of responsibilities of the state management authorized entity and 
subordinate agencies, regional and local self governing bodies involved in the field of 
education with a view of functions delineation and coordination  
2.  Implementation of unified state policy in the field of professional education 
3.  Democratization of education management 
4.  Decentralization of education management and increased autonomy of the 
educational institutions 
5.  Improvement of control mechanisms and reporting systems 
6.  Development of management skills among the high officials of the education system 
7.  Provision of equal competitiveness between the state and non-state educational 
institutions 
 
Activities 
 
1.  Revision of the system for appointment and dismissal of cadres in the field of 
secondary education, state attestation of the heads of secondary  schools 
2.  Provision for participation of the community, parents and NGOs in the management 
of secondary schools 
                                                
1 The activities and measures to provide for the legal side of the educational development are 
jointly presented in Part 6.  
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  23 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
3.  Elaboration of new mechanisms for appointment of top officials in the mid and higher 
state educational institutions 
4.  Elaboration and implementation of an efficient system for attestation, qualification 
improvement and training of top officials in the mid and higher state educational 
institutions 
5.  Increased autonomy within the higher educational institutions: re-distribution of 
functions among the structural units (rector’ s office, faculties, Departments) of the 
higher educational institutions 
6.  Improvement of the comprehensive information collection and analysis system on 
the educational institutions with the objective of efficient decision making and 
planning at all the managerial levels 
7.  Centralization of state management in the field of education within one agency- the 
state authorized education management agency 
8.  Licensing, accreditation of non-state educational institutions and their inclusion into 
the unified education system 
 
4.  Integration into the international educational community 
 
Objectives: 
 
1.  Provision for comparison of the education system of Armenia with the education 
systems of the developed countries 
2.  Correspondence of state educational criteria to the international standards  
3.  Introduction of modern information and training technologies and methods 
4.  Promotion of horizontal links among the educational institutions 
5.  Promotion of (Armenia-Diaspora) in-nation integration in the field of education  
6.  Provision for mutual recognition and equality of the graduation certificates of the 
state sample in the field of education 
 
Activities:  
 
1.  Membership  to  the  international  educational  institutions  and  participation  in  the 
international educational programs  
2.  Transfer to 11 year full secondary schooling 
3.  Expansion of the three-level higher educational system 
4.  Orientation of professional education with a focus on international markets demands 
5.  Systemized introduction of state educational criteria 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  24 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
6.  Update of knowledge evaluation system according to the international standards 
7.  Participation in international reviews and studies on knowledge evaluations 
8.  Computerization of education and expansion of Internet connections 
9.  Expansion of distant learning system  
10. Reinforcement of connections with the Diaspora  educational institutions and 
provision of comprehensive support  
11. Establishment of all-Armenian educational –scientific center in the system of higher 
education 
12. Full operation of a statistical information system in compliance with the international 
standards of education – data collection, analysis, publication and dissemination to 
respective international organizations.  
 
5.  Provision for the education accessibility and outreach 
 
Objectives: 
 
1.  Provision for the education accessibility 
2.  Increased enrollment in the pre-school institutions 
3.  Provision for full enrollment in the main secondary schooling system 
4.  Provision of state and social guarantees to the enrolled students 
 
Activities: 
 
1.  Introduction of low-fee services in the field of secondary schooling 
2.  Elaboration of a unified system for tuition discounts in the educational institutions 
3.  Publication of scientific-popular literature, and organization of TV and radio programs 
for parents and students 
4.  Provision of comprehensive assistance to children from socially vulnerable families 
through involvement of charitable and sponsoring organizations 
5.  Provision of every pupil of the Republic with basic textbooks 
6.  Expansion of provision of special pedagogical, social, psychological services  in the 
secondary schools and communities for the children needing special educational 
conditions 
7.  Provision for the equality of special education and secondary education curricula 
8.  Restructuring of social services system in the educational institutions 
 
 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  25 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
6.  Provision with pedagogical and scientific-pedagogical cadres 
 
Objectives: 
 
1.  Younger age structure of the scientific-pedagogical staff 
2.  Improvement of the system preparing pedagogical cadres, modernization of the 
structure and contents of the pedagogical education in compliance with the new 
requirements imposed on the pedagogues 
3.  Restructuring of the system for qualification improvement and re-training of cadres 
4.  Elaboration of program for social protection of the cadres 
 
Activities: 
 
1.  Elaboration of principles for formation of state order for MA and PH. D. degree 
programs  
2.  Identification of priorities in reproduction of scientific-pedagogical cadres 
3.  Elaboration of a program on involvement of students in scientific research activities  
4.  University-fication of pedagogical education 
5.  Introduction of new pedagogical professions 
6.  Elaboration of new tariff-qualification description for the pedagogues  
7.  Teachers qualification improvement and attestation 
8.  Restoration of qualification improvement system for the professors/lecturers in the 
field of their professional studies  
9.  Preparation of pedagogues for Diaspora and their qualification improvement  
10. Expansion of social privileges for the pedagogical personnel  
 
 
7.  Unification of the educational and upbringing processes  
 
Objectives: 
 
1.  Enrichment of the contents of education with knowledge aimed at formation of an 
individual and citizen 
2.  Rehabilitation and development of out-of-class activities and out-of-school upbringing 
systems  
 
 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  26 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
Activities: 
 
1.  Modernization of the contents of humanitar subjects included in the curricula and 
introduction of a course on national psychology   
2.  Development of a concept on upbringing in compliance with the new political and 
social-economic conditions 
3.  Elaboration of a plan of action  providing for the spiritual upbringing 
4.  Elaboration of a plan of action  providing for the military-patriotic upbringing 
5.  Establishment of conditions providing for children’s  upbringing in families 
6.  Rearrangement  of  the  out-of-school  upbringing  complex  in  line  with  the  new 
objectives. 
 
8.   Improvement of the material-technical and educational methodical basis  
 
Objectives: 
 
1.  Improvement of building conditions of the educational institutions  
2.  Modernization and extension of the equipment, furniture and laboratory basis  of the 
educational institutions 
3.  Provision for sanitary hygienic conditions, health care and safety measures in the 
educational institutions 
4.  Update and expansion of the publications-information catalogues of the libraries 
 
Activities: 
 
1.  Allocation of state targeted funding  
2.  Involvement of charitable and sponsoring organizations 
3.  Inventory of educational institutions 
4.  Construction, capital  renovation and on-going repairs of the buildings of educational 
institutions 
5.  Resumption of the performances of centralized and individual heating systems of the 
educational institutions 
6.  Identification and redistribution of unutilized or under-utilized material-technical 
internal resources  
7.  Provision of the educational institutions with necessary equipment and furniture  
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  27 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
8.  Rehabilitation of the laboratories and crafts studios in the educational institutions and 
their refurbishment with modern equipment, test materials, and educational didactic 
accessories 
9.  Refurbishment of educational institutions with modern technical devices, information 
and computer equipment and communication means  
10. Update of the educational curriculum and educational methodological basis 
11. Full operation of the system for publication of basic textbooks and their rental system 
in the secondary schooling 
12. Expansion of professional literature and scientific-methodological publications and 
their varieties providing for their accessibility for the pedagogical and scientific-
pedagogical personnel 
13.  Expansion of library resources of the educational institutions and establishment of 
electronic libraries  
14. Provision of material basis for health care, nutrition, leisure and other spheres of life 
of the students and pedagogues. 
 
 
9.  Rationalization of the education system 
 
 
Objectives: 
 
1.  Increased efficiency and rational performance of educational institutions and the 
allocated budgetary  resources  
2.  Optimization of locations of the educational institutions 
3.  Optimization of organizational criteria of the educational institutions’ performances 
(student-pedagogue ratio, average density   of the educational groups, average 
workload of pedagogues,  etc) 
4.  Making the list of the fields of studies offered in pre-professional and professional 
educational  institutions  in  line  with  the  social-economic  peculiarities  and 
development perspectives of the area.  
 
Activities: 
 
 
1.  Mapping of the educational institutions 
2.  Elaboration of principles for optimal relocation of the educational institutions 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  28 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
3.  Optimal relocation of the net of educational institutions and programs offered (among 
them also preparation of specialists) particularly,  
a)  Providing for the performance of at least one pre-school institution in every 
community  
b)  Unification of closely situated and under loaded schools located in densely populated 
country-like settlements  
c)  Change in the profile of the school 
d)  Revision of the institutions of special types and rationalization of the net 
e)  Decentralization of special pedagogical services and introduction into the secondary 
schools 
f)  Introduction of new list of fields of studies for mid and higher educational institutions 
g)  Optimal relocation of mid and higher educational institutions, elimination of 
duplication in the fields of preparation of professionals 
4.  Revision of exemplary staff list and normative criteria of educational institutions for 
organization of educational processes, particularly,   
a)  Optimization of pedagogue-student ratio through allowed increase in the grades 
(groups),  and increased average workload of pedagogues 
b)  Optimization of support and administrative staffs ratio 
c)  Filling in the under-grouped grades (groups) 
d)  Preparation of multi-profile teachers 
e)  Formation of two-set or triple set classes in case of severely under-loaded classes 
 
10. Making the education structure and contents in line with the requirement of 
market relations  
 
Objectives: 
 
1.  Transfer to 11 year secondary (full) school 
2.  Development of preliminary professional education (craftsmanship) 
3.  Provision for consequent and unified introduction of the professional education 
qualification system  
4.  Making the educational toolkit in line with the education  structure and contents 
5.  Liberalization and humanitarization of education 
 
 
 
 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  29 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
Activities: 
 
1.  Revision of the educational criteria for the secondary schools, educational plans 
curricula and training materials  related to the shift towards the 11-year secondary 
school 
2.  Readjustment of the professional technical schools into an handicraft industrial 
vocational high schools 
3.  Implementation of handicraft industrial curriculum in special institutions 
4.  Labor market survey for identification of the demand for professionals with BA, MA, 
graduate specialists, and professions.  
5.  Development of tariff qualification description of specialists.  
6.  Development of the concept on arrangement of educational practices of the students 
in the new economic conditions and its implementation  
7.  Development of educational criteria for subjects and professions studied 
8.  Modernization of educational plans of fields of studies, curricula, other educational-
methodological documents, in compliance with labor market requirements  
9.  Introduction of new humanitar and social-economic subjects in the training courses 
aimed at formation of a citizen, full member of the society  
10. Centralization of state control over the education quality.  
 
 
 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  30 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
 
PART 4 
STATE AND SOCIAL GUARANTEES OF THE PUPILS/STUDENTS 
 
 
The main directions in the field of the studdents state and social guranntees are:  
 
( :1)  Providing for enjoyoment of  the right of citizens on free secondary school 
educaation, 
( :1)  Expansion of assessibility for free (on a compatitive basis) mid, higher and post 
graduate professional education for the childreen of the military conflict victims, 
handicapped children aas well as for those having displayed unique abilities by 
utilization of additional gurantees for provision of  the right on educcaaaion 
( :1)  Granting the possibility for selection of  courses  to professional education and 
individually tailored programs, establishment of conditions providing for the 
professional orientation 
( :1)  Granting financial privileges to the students on using of the social-cultural facilities 
(hostels/dormitories, libraries, museums, cultural, physical training, fitness, health 
care facilities) and transport 
( :1)  Development of self-management of the students in training, living and leisure 
activities,  
( :1)  Elaboration and implementation of a system providing for the life and health care of 
the students 
( :1)  Establishment of necessary conditions for the citizens needing special educational 
conditions for fixing the development deviations and providing social adjustment 
( :1)  Elaboration of rewards system in recognition of achievements in the field of 
education and science 
( :1)  Allocation of budgetary funds for maintenance of objects of the social-cultural 
infrastructure of the field of education and provision of social support to the students 
in compliance with the Law of RoA “on Education”. 
( :1)  Improvement of the legal basis for interrelations between the pedagogical staff, 
students and parents (legitimate representatives) 
( :1)  Provision of free textbooks to the pupils in elementary schools  
 
 
 
 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  31 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
PART 5 
PROGRAM FUNDING 
 
The total financial expenses required for the development of field of education are 
calculated based on the Articles of the Law “on Education” with a view to the provision of 
funding to the education sector and provision of social guarantees.   
Currently the budgetary allocations earmarked for education do not provide for the full 
operation of educational institutions and do not cover the considerable part of the 
necessary expenses related to nutrition, communal services, building maintenance, etc.  
Actually, no funds are practically projected in the budget for the development of training-
materials basis. The available funding does not provide for updated training processes 
meeting the current requirements, as well as for establishment of satisfactory social 
conditions for the employees and students.  
The funding of the education sector and activities stated in the program is to be carried 
out in two directions: 
( :1)  Increased budgetary  funding to the educational institutions and other organizations 
of the field of education, on condition that the efficiency for utilization of the allocated 
budgetary resources should be increased 
( :1)   Establishment of conditions for involvement of additional out-of-budgetary funding 
sources without decreasing the absolute amounts, norms and normatives of 
budgetary funding.   
 
The volume of program implementation investments and other program related 
expenses could be verified on a yearly basis based on the potential of thee state and 
local budgets and other sources not prohibited by the laws.  
 
It is planned to: 
( :1)  Increase the state budget allocation for the expenditures of the sector up to 4% of 
the GDP by year 2005, and for current expenditures - 16% 
( :1)  Increase the wages of pedagogues for 30% every year  
( :1)  Starting from January 1, 2003 – bringing the tariff payments of the administrative 
staff of the sector to the level of the average salary of a budgetary enterprise 
employee  
( :1)  By 2005 increase the stipends two-folds 
( :1)  Starting from January 1, 2003 free provision of textbooks to the pupils of elementary 
school  
 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  32 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
Part 6 
 
Program Activities and Impelemnation Timelines 
 
1. Improvement of the financial situation of education  
Implementation 
No  Activity 
Timeline  
1    Provision for increased budgetary funding of education for 1% 
2001-05 
annually  
2    Elaboration of principles for proportional allocation of budgetary 
2003 
resources according to the education components and 
Third quarter 
implementation mechanisms  
3    Mandatory allocation of funds from the state budget to the preschool 
institutions (in program part) and provision for its gradual increase  2001-05 
totaling to 3% of the education sector’s share  
4    By the decision of the Government of RoA, mandatory allocation of 
funds from the local budgets to the preschool educational institutions  2002 
and out-of-school upbringing  
5    Elaboration of per pupil funding mechanisms and formula for pre-
school and out-of-school educational institutions in one budget line  2002. 
item, its approval and introduction ( as a pilot program for its first two  Januray 
years) 
6    Elaboration, approval and introduction of instruments for  2001 
management of parents’ payments and other out-budgetary funds.  Third quarter 
7    Transfer of 100 secondary schools to a new funding principle (per  2001. 
pupil funding projected in one budget line item)  September 
8    Gradual transfer of the secondary school to the new funding 
2002-05 
principles  
9    Revised elaboration of funding mechanisms and formula by providing 
2001 
a special ratio  to schools for provision of complete education to the 
Fourth quarter 
children in secondary schools needing special conditions   
10   Elaboration of new funding principles for special school in one budget  2001 
line item   Fourth quarter 
11   Pilot funding of 10 special schools according to the new principles   2002-03 
12   Transfer of all special schools to the new funding principles  2003-05 
13   Elaboration, approval and implementation of new -per pupil- funding  2002 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  33 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
principles in one budget line item for middle and higher professional  January 
educational institutions    
14   Elaboration, approval and implementation of mechanisms for  2001 
provision of paid services in the secondary schools   Third quarter 
15   Elaboration of principles for definition and regulation of educational  2001 
fees in the educational institutions   Third quarter 
16   Elaboration, approval and implementation of mechanisms for issuing 
long term loans to the students enrolled in mid and higher  2003 
professional educational institutions for covering the education related  Third quarter 
expenses   
17   Elaboration of a concept for granting tax privileges to the programs 
implemented within the educational institutions through provision of 
paid educational services and programs implemented by  different  2002-03 
organizations aimed at supporting the education sector, and making  
amendments in respective laws.  
 
 
2. Improvement of the legislative field 
1    Elaboration of draft law of RoA on “Making Amendments in the Law of  2001 
RoA “on Education”.   Third quarter 
2    Elaboration of draft law of RoA on “Making Amendments in the Law of  2001 
RoA on “Local self-governing bodies”   Second quarter 
3    Elaboration of draft law of RoA on “Making Amendments in the Law of  2001 
RoA ”Putting into practice the Civil Code of RoA”   Second quarter 
4    Elaboration of draft law of RoA on “Higher and post graduate  2001 
professional eductaion”   Fourth quarter 
5    2001 
Elaboration of draft law of RoA on “Mid-level professional education”  
Fourth quarter 
6    Definidtion of the list of normative acts for the field of education    2001-02 
7    Elaboration of a draft exemplary charter for special eductaional  2001 
instituions   Third quarter 
8    Elaboration of a draft exemplary charter for pre-school eductaional  2001 
instituitions    Second quarter 
9    Elaboration of a draft exemplary charter for out-of-school eductaional  2001 
instituitions   Second quarter 
10   Elaboration of a draft exemplary charter for secondary schools   2001 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  34 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
First quarter  
11   Elaboration of regulations for setting tutitiinn fees in mid and heigher  2001 
professional instituions and their uitlization   First quarter  
12   2001 
Elaboration and approval of  noramtive acts on preschool education  
Fourth quarter 
13   Elaboration and approval of  noramtive acts on secondary (full)  2001 
education   Fourth quarter 
14   2001 
Elaboration and approval of  noramtive acts on special education  
Third quarter 
15   Elaboration and approval of  noramtive acts on additional education   2001 
16   Elaboration and approval of  noramtive acts on preliminary  2001  
professional education   Third quarter  
17   Elaboration and approval of normative acts on middle professional  2001  
education   Second quarter  
18   Elaboration and approval of normative acts on higher professional 
2002 
education  
19   Elaboration and approval of normative acts on post-graduate  2002  
education (jointly with ´àÐ)  Second quarter  
20   Elaboartion of a program on makinf amendments and revising the  2001 
existing normative acts   First quaretr 
21   Puablication of a yaerly catalogue of the normative acts   Fourth quarter of 
every year  
 
 
3. Improvement of the management system   
1    Definition of the responsibilities and authorities of the Ministry of 
Education and Science of RoA, subordinate agencies, regional and  2001 
local self-governing bodies involved in the field of education by the  Fourth quarter 
decree of the Government of RoA   
2    Approval of the appointment and dismissal regulations of the Heads  2001 
of educational Institutions by the Government of RoA     Fourth quarter 
3    Attestation of senior officials of the pre-school educational institutions  
2002-05 
(2 Marzes yearly) 
4    Organization of training courses for the senior officials of the pre 
2001-05 
school institutions  
5    Transfer to new- school council management system in 100  2001 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  35 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
secondary schools   September 
6    Gradual transfer of secondary schools to the new management 
2002-05. 
system-through the school councils   
7    Organization of training courses for principles, memebers of the 
school councils and accountants of the schools shifted over to the  2001-05 
new management system  
8    Intoductaion of secondary school management modern information  2002 
system  with global and local computer netwoks   May 
9    Yearly and regular collection, summarization and analysis of 
 
statistical data describing the comprehensive performance of the 
Starting from 2002 
schools; making this information available to all the levels of 
 
management   
10   Elaboration and implementation of a strategy and plan of action for 
involvement of parents, NGOs and charitable organizations in the  2001 
management of secondary schools  
11   Formation of management councils for special pilot schools   2001Ã. 
12   Organization of training courses for principles and members of the 
2002Ã. 
councils of the special pilot schools  
13   Pilot programs results assessment of the schools transferred to new 
2002-05 
management and funding principles and expansion of the program   
14   Promotion of the NGOs and charitable organizations dealing with the 
2002-05 
problems of special education Ð 
15   Elaboration of medical-psychological-pedagogical (MPP) assessment 
2001 – 02 
criteria for children needing special educational conditions    
16   Elaboration and approval of charters for Marz and Republican MPPs   2001 
17   Formation and training of MPP commissions   2002 
18   Identification and screening of children needing special educational 
conditions by Marzes   2002-03 
19   Establishment of the database of children needing special 
educational conditions within the program of Management Information 
2002-04 
Systems of the Secondary Schooling (MIS) 
20   Re-transferring the state mid and higher professional educational  2001 
institutions of the line ministries under the supervision of the Ministry  Third-Fourth 
of Education and Science of RoA by the decision of the Government  quarter  
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  36 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
of RoA.  
21   Revision of the state mid and higher professional educational  2002 
institutions’ charters (decision of the Government of RoA)  March 
22   Introduction of new appointment and dismissal procedures for the  2001 
Heads of mid and higher professional educational institutions.   Fourth quarter 
23   Attestation of the senior officials of mid-level professional educational  2001 
institutions   April 
24   Operation of an efficient system for qualification improvement and 
training of senior officials of mid-level professional educational  2002-05 
institutions (in foreign countries, too) 
25   Introduction of new system for evaluation of the students’ knowledge 
2001 
and state attestation of graduate students/alumni   
26   Elaboration and introduction of principles of autonomy for higher  2001 
educational institutions   Fourth quarter  
27   Operation of annual reporting systems for mid and higher 
professional educational institutions, based on which – the  2001 
assessment of their performances and elaboration of activities aimed  August  
at their improvement  
28   Signing memorandums of understanding and agreements with the 
professional, business unions and NGOs of the Republic on  2001–05 
cooperation in the field of professional education.  
29   Licensing, attestation and accreditation of non-state educational 
2001-05ÃÃ. 
institutions  
 
 
4. Integration into the International educational Community  
1    Restoration of connections with the preschool and special educational 
2001-02 
institutions and centers of the CIS countries ²äÐ ³Ý¹³Ù-»ñÏñÝ»ñÇ  
2    Expansion of cooperation with international organizations  
2001-03 
/UNESCO, UNDP, UNEVOC, CEDEFOP, BIBB. etc./  
3    Expansion of involvemnet in programs supported by European Union 
2001-03 
/TEMPUS, INCO-COPERNICUS, INTAS, etc./  
4    Submission of project proposal to the international donor-
organizations for grants programs in the field of professional  2001-05 
education  
5    Arrangement of study tours to foreign countries for pedagogues of  2001-05 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  37 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
preschool and special institutions ( 3-trips per year) 
6    Promotion of computerization and internetization of schools  
a/ establishment of computer classes at 50 schools yearly 
2001-05 
b/ establishment of at least one school-center in every Marz equipped 
with modern technologies and having Internet access  
7    Establishment of republican inter-university computerized network  
2002 
/with Internet access/  
8    Introduction of modern system for knowledge evaluation:  2001-02 
a/ Establishment of a knowledge evaluation center   2001 
b/ Elaboration and introduction of knowledge evaluation system   2002 
c/ Organization of a republican contest of knowledge   2003 
d/ Organization of an all-Armenian contest of knowledge   2004 
e/ Participation in international contest of knowledge   2004–05 
9    2001 
 Introduction of ISCED  
 
³/ Formation of national experts team on education  
2001 
µ/ Collection, analysis and dissemination of comparable information 
 
and statistical data on education 
2002 
10   Introduction and operation of EUROSTAT professional educational 
2001 
statistical analysis system (including “Target critertia”  
11   Adoption of the Government decree of RoA on “Distance learning”   2002 
12   Organization of distance professional education within the framework 
2003 
of distance learning program  
13   Mapping of the Diaspora educational institutions and their needs 
2001 
assessment  
14   Preparation of special textbooks and methodological guidelines (3 
textbooks and one guidebook yearly) matching the various  2002-05 
environments of Diaspora  
15   Implementation of a program for the visit of Diaspora pupils to 
Armenia /100 pupils per year/. Organization of the joint leisure time  2001-05 
for both - Diaspora and local Armenian children  
16   Establishment of direct connections between the schools of Armenia 
2001-05 
and Disappear; implementation of sister-schools /10 schools per year/  
17   Regular update of the web page of the Ministry of Education and 
2001-05 
Science of ROA  
18   Establishment of all Armenian educational-scientific center in the  2003 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  38 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
Yerevan State University  
19   Introduction of three-degree leveled higher education in the 
2004 
pedagogical universities  
20   Signing agreements with the CIS countries on mutual recognition of 
2001 
state graduate certificates  and their equality  
21   Signing bilateral agreements with various foreign countries on mutual 
2002-05 
recognition of graduate certificates  and their equality  
 
 
5. Provision for education accessibility and outreach  
1    Survey of the population demand in the field of preschool education   2001-02 
2    Introduction of various pre-school educational services   2002-05 
3    Broadcasting TV and Radio programs for parents and publication of 
2001-05 
methodological literature  
4    Gradual increase in the number of children enrolled in pre-school 
2002-05 
institutions ( 5 % annually)  
5    Organization of short term preparation courses for 6 year old children   2001-02 
6    Continuation of the  pilot program on integrated care and upbringing 
of children needing special educational conditions in the pre-school  2001-02 
institutions  
7    Elaboration and introduction of mechanisms for reimbursement of 
2002Ã 
educational expenses of school aged children from socially 
Second half  
vulnerable families  
8    Continuation of the pilot program implementation in Lori Marz on 
provision of support services for those children needing special  2001-02 
educational conditions  
9    Elaboration of regulations and respective methodological guidelines 
for providing for the education of those children needing special  2001 
educational conditions in the secondary schools  
10   Organization of joint conferences with the Marz educational 
2001-05 
departments, humanitarian and charitable foundations  
11   Organization of competitions and exhibition of the works of children 
2001-05 
needing special educational conditions  
12   Broadcasting TV and radio programs dedicated to the rights of 
2001-05 
children needing special educational conditions  
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  39 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
13   Admission to higher educational institutions a number of students 
exceeding the approved planned quotas, without granting them the  2001-05 
right for postponed obligatory military service  
14   2001 
Expansion of the list of professions offered through distance learning  
August 
15   Implementation and provision of extern learning opportunities for  2002 
certain fields of studies.   September  
16   Expansion of the list of professions offered on a competitive basis in 
2001 
mid level educational institutions based on the graduation marks of 
August 
the secondary school certificates  
17   Broadcasting TV and radio programs called “Assistance to applicants 
to higher educational institutions” and publication of comprehensive  2001-05 
literature  
18   Setting a unified discount system for tuition fees in the educational  2001  
institutions   First quarter  
     
  6. Provision with Pedagogical and Scientific-Pedagogical Cadres  
1    Elaboration and approval of regulations for formation of  state order 
quotas on admission to mid and higher professional educational  2001 
institutions of RoA   
2    Elaboration and approval of regulations for formation of state order 
2001 
quotas on admission to MA and Ph.D. degree programs  
3    In terms of reproduction of scientific-pedagogical cadres of priority 
fields of scientific studies: 
a/ basic scientific directions  
2001-05 
b/innovative, prospective scientific directions  
c/ political/social sciences, 
d/ Armenian subjects knowledge 
4    Elaboration and approval of programs for involvement of students in 
2001 
the scientific research activities  
5    Elaboration and approval of programs for involvement of aspirants 
(post graduate students) in the educational processes of the  2001-05 
institutions  
6    Re-establishment of pedagogical higher educational institutions into 
2001- 03 
universities  
7    Introduction of new professions (social worker- pedagogue,  2001- 03 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  40 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
physiologist-pedagogue, pedagogue for integrated courses, multi-
profile pedagogue, etc)  in the pedagogical higher professional 
educational institutions  
8    Approval of new tariff qualification description of pedagogues   2003 
9    Introduction of special educational courses in the training programs of 
2002 
pre-school and elementary school  
10   Organization of focused admission for special educational institutions   2002 
11   Preparation of integrated course and multi-profile teachers for under-
loaded schools, organization of focused distance learning provision in  2001-05 
the pedagogical higher educational institutions. 
12   Elaboration and approval of new regulations on “Education of foreign 
2001 
citizens in the Republic of Armenia”  
13   Focused preparation of pedagogical cadres in Armenia for Diaspora 
2001-05 
in most prior fields of studies (80 teachers annually)  
14   Preparation of scientific-pedagogical cadres in Armenia for Diaspora  
2001-05 
(10 aspirants annually) 
15   Qualification improvement of Diaspora -Armenian pedagogues in 
2001-05 
“Diaspora center ” (50 teachers annually) 
16   Organization of yearly qualification improvement courses in the 
2001-02 
Marzes for the pre-school institutions personnel  
17   Establishment of republican network for teachers qualification 
2001-02 
improvement  
18   Operation a system for teachers training and qualification 
2002 
improvement  
19   Adoption of a decision on making amendments in the decision No   
327 of the Government of RoA, issued May 07, 1991    
Opening qualification improvement faculties for professors/lecturers   
from the field of professional education – differentiated by the higher  2001 
educational institutions   
a/ in Yerevan State University – a faculty for qualification  2001-02 
improvement of general subjects professors, lecturers   
b/ in Yerevan State University of Economy – faculty for qualification  2001-02 
improvement of economists     
 c/ in State Architectural University of Armenia –faculty for  2001-02 
qualification improvement of mid-level professional educational 
institutions’ teachers  
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  41 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
20   Elaboration of attestation regulations for the professors/lecturers of   
the higher educational institutions    
 a/ approval of attestation criteria   2002 
b/ conducting attestation  2003-04 
21   Setting supplementary payments for special pedagogues   2002 
22   Within the framework of “Rural school” program- provision of the 
remote and borderline settlements with pedagogical cadres by 
2001-05 
providing necessary living and working conditions (provision of 
housing, etc.)  
23   Definition of additional privileges for the male teachers assigned to 
2002 
work in rural areas  
24   Organization of annul competitions for the titles of “The best tutor”, 
2001-05 
“The best teacher” and “The best principle” 
25   Establishment of inter-university sub-faculties for military training for 
2002 
the pupose of preperation of officers for the armed forces of RoA  
 
 
7. Unification of training and upbringing processes  
1    2001 
Elaboration, discussion and approval of concept on upbringing  
March 
2    Organization of republican scientific meeting on the problems of  2001. 
upbringing   July  
3    Modernization of antropological sciences programs included in the 
secondary school curricula, introduction of new subjects and  2001-03 
publication of textbooks   
4    Introduction of “National Physiology” course in the secondary, mid 
2002 
and higher professional educational institutions  
5    Elaboration and approval of a plan of action providing for the spiritual  2001 
training of the enrolled students   October  
6    Restoration of the Military training classrooms in the secondary 
schools and mid level professional educational instituions, provision  2001-03 
with training armaments   
7    Organization of yearly military-patriotic drills and competitions among 
2001-05 
the schoolchildren  
8    Elaboration and approval of recommendations and plans of action for  2001 
rehabilitation of the upbringing complex consisting from both-training  May  
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  42 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
and upbringing processes  (decision of the Government of RoA) 
 
9    Introduction of the positions of social-worker-pedagogue, physicist –
2003 
pedagogue  in the secondary schools  
10   Organization of qualification improvement courses for deputy heads 
and administrative employees of secondary schools on upbringing 
2002–05 
issues  
 
11   Broadcasting TV and radio programs for parents on children 
upbringing and publication of scientific popular publications   2001–05 
 
12    In rural communities establishment of “kindergarten-school’ 
educational complexes   2002-05 
 
13   Promotion of children’s, teenagers and youth NGOs (patriotic, 
environmental, creative, etc. ) activities   2001–05 
 
14   Organization of annual competitions, festivals and athletic events of 
esthetic education of children/teenagers/youth.   2001–05 
 
 
 
8. Improvement of the Material- technical and educational-methodological basis 
 
1    Elaboration of a draft Government decree of RoA on “Maintenance 
2002 
and restoration of pre-school buildings and facilities ”  
2    Elaboration and implementation of development programs for pre-
2001-05 
school institutions through the humanitarian assistance organizations  
3    Expansion of the “Step by step” program (by involving 50 
2001-05 
kindergartens yearly)  
4    Publication of methodological guidelines for pre-school institutions  
2001-05 
(2 guides yearly) 
5    Accomplishment of school construction in the disaster zone – by 
moving all the schools located in domiks and adjusted buildings into  2001 
typical buildings  
6    Capital renovation of 280 secondary school buildings (20%-per year)  2002-05 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  43 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
7    Establishment of computer centers and provision of Internet access to  
2001-05 
250 secondary schools ( 20%- per year)  
8    Within the program of “School furniture and laboratory equipment 
provision of secondary schools with physical-mathematics and natural 
2001-05 
sciences bias with 50 laboratories in each- physics and chemistry and 
50 in biology (10% of the yearly demand) 
9    Allocation of 13500 blackboards to the secondary  schools (20%-per 
2002-05 
year) 
10   Allocation of 140000 school tables and chairs to the secondary 
2001-05 
schools (10%-per year) 
11   Renovation of special schools  (3 buildings per year)  2002-05 
12   Refurbishment of training laboratories and workshops in special 
2002-05 
schools  
13   Replacement of educational furniture for the special schools (10%- 
2002-05 
per year)  
14   Publication of textbooks and respective methodological guidelines for 
2001-05 
special education  (10 textbooks, 2 guidebooks per year)  
15   Printing a methodic publication for preschool and special education   2002 
16   Equipping the mid-level professional educational institutions with at 
least one computer classrooms, establishment of a computerized net  2002-05 
for mid-level professional educational institutions 
17   Rehabilitation and operation of the heating systems of mid-level and 
2001-05 
higher professional educational institutions  
18   Modification of the training-laboratory equipment of the mid and 
2001-05 
higher professional educational institutions   
19   Restoration and development of the publication practice based on the 
higher school by involving investors in the fields of textbooks, 
2002-05 
guidelines, manuals and other training-methodological materials 
publications.  
20   Organization of publication of textbooks for higher educational 
institutions by 
2002 
a/ providing state loans 
b/ organizing subscription among the students and lecturers  
 
9. Rationalization of the education sector  
1    Re-adoption of exemplary staff list for the preschool institutions and  2001 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  44 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
normative density of the groups  
2    Passportization of the pre-schools buildings and facilities   2002 
3    Initiation of new kindergartens in communities not having preschool 
2002-05 
institutions  
4    2001 
Mapping of the secondary schools and data collection  
First quarter 
5    Elaboration of criteria for identification of optimal locations of the 
secondary schools, their strategic importance and protection;  2001 
approval of the list of those schools by the Government decision of  First quarter 
RoA. 
6    Revision and approval of the exemplary staff lists of schools and  2001 
normative criteria for organization of educational processes   First quarter 
7    Elaboration of pilot rationalization programs for three educational  2001 
zones and approval by the decision of the Government of RoA   First quarter 
8    Implementation of inter-school and in-school pilot rationalization  2001-second 
program in three educational zones   quarter- 2002 
9    Finalization of the outcomes of the pilot rationalization program   2002 
10   Expansion of rationalization program within the Republic   2003-05 
11   Mapping of special institutions and definition of the areas to be served   2001 
12   Definition of the types of special institutions   2001 
13   Re-structuring of special institutions   2001-02 
14   Definition of an exemplary staff list for the special educational 
2001 
institutions  
15   Revision of the normative  density in classrooms and group of special 
2001 
institutions  
16   Re-arrangement of classrooms and groups in compliance with the 
2001-02 
defined normatives  
17   Analysis of marzes’ and regions’ social-demographic situation of the  2001 
Republic , workforce demand, and social order   October 
18   Rationalization of the net of professional educational institutions 
2001 
through restructuring, regional relocation, changes in the profile and 
September 
organizational legal status. 
19   Labor market survey for identification of the list of professions in 
2001 
demand and knowledge/skills/qualifications/abilities/  of the required 
May 
professionals 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  45 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
 
20  
Restructuring of professional technical vocational schools   Starting 2001  
21  
Analysis of the existing list of professions provided by professional 
2001 
education from the point of view the labor market, identification of 
May 
new and unnecessary professions  
22   Elaboration and approval of new list for professional educational  2001 
specialties   June 
23   Elaboration and introduction of a more reasonable internal structures  2001 
for mid level professional educational institutions   May 
24   Elaboration, testing, approval and introduction of new curricula, 
2003 
training plans and other educational-methodological documents for 
June 
mid level professional educational institutions 
25   Introduction of preliminary professional (craftsmanship) training in the 
2001 
mid level professional educational institutions and organization of the 
September 
training 
26   Elaboration and implementation of programs for preparation of 
2002 
preliminary professional cadres (craftsmen)  and training of 
January 
unemployed in the mid level professional educational institutions  
 
 
10.Making the structure and contents of education in compliance with the market 
relations  
1  Transfer to 11 year school   2001-02acad. 
a/ conducting a republican pedagogical conference   year 
b/matching the secondary (full) school criteria with the new school  2001 January 
structures,   
c/ matching the basic educational curricula to the curricula of 11- year  2001 August  
schooling   2001 August  
d/ matching the subjects’ curricula to the requirements of 11-year   
schooling e/ elaboration of criteria for subjects’ and newly introduced  2002 December  
subjects, curricula and textbooks.    
f/ Elaboration of methodological guidelines and letters to provide for  2001-02 
the further temporary utilization of the existing textbooks   2001 December   
g/ Introduction of new textbooks in the transition period ,  starting from 2nd 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  46 State program for educational development  (2001-2005.) 
quarter of 2002 
h/ Transition to 6-day schooling week  
 
2001-02 acad. 
year 
2  Introduction of integrated subjects  2002 
3  Establishment of educational complexes in big settlements with 
2001-02 
attached distance learning courses  
4  Establishment of a Syunik state university based on the Kapan and 
Goris educational complexes of the State Architectural University of  2002 
Armenia  
5  Elaboration and approval of criteria for middle and higher professional 
2001-02 
education  
6  Matching the professional educational plans and subjects’ curricula to 
2002-03 
the approved criteria   
7  Identification  of  the  requirements  imposed  upon  the  qualification 
levels of higher professional education  according to the professions  2002 
and labor market 
8  Definition of the fields for the performances of bachelors, diploma 
graduate specialists, and magistrates  by differentiation of the types  2002 
of professions and labor market   
9  Elaboration of tariff-qualification descriptions of professionals    2003 
10  Elaboration  and  approval  of  new  regulations  for  organization  of 
2002 
students’ practice works  
11  Projection of job opportunities during the practice, contract signing 
2003-05 
with the enterprises  
12  Introduction  of  “Law,  “Basics  of  Economy”  “§´³ñáÛ³·ÇïáõÃÛáõÝ¦,” 
2001-05 
“Ecology”, “History of Culture” and other subjects into the curricula  
13  Promotion of higher educational institution and school relationship, 
implementation of professional orientation programs for the pupils  in  2001-05 
the schools by the higher educational institutions  
 
 
 
Armenia Educational national plan.doc  47 